NILE, the longest river of Africa, and second in length of all 
the rivers of the globe, draining a vast area in north-east Africa, 
from the East African lake plateau to the shores of the Mediter- 
ranean. Although falling short of the length of the Mississippi- 
Missouri (4194 m. according to the estimate of General Tillo 1 )* 
the Nile is at the head of all rivers as regards the length of its 
basin, which extends through 35 of latitude or 2450 m. in a 
direct line, with a waterway of about 4000 m. The Nile proper, 
Le. from the outlet at Victoria Nyanza to the sea, is 3473 m. long. 

	1 General Alexi A. Tillo (1839-1900), Russian scientist and 
	geographer, author of works on geodesy, meteorology, &c. 

	6e»*rrw*lk*r tc 

The Name. — The early Egyptians called 
this river by a name which was probably 
pronounced Hap. It seems to be con- 
nected with a root meaning " concealed," 
" mysterious." This survived as a religious 
designation down to the fall of paganism. 
The " great river " was also a frequent 
name for the main stream, and this 
became the usual name of the Nile in 
late times as Ier-'o and continued in use 
amongst the Copts. In the Bible the 
Nile is regularly named Ye6r (^ K *, **l), 
from the contemporary Egyptian Yor, 
c river." The origin of the Greek and 
Roman name NctXos, Nilus, is quite 
unknown. Atywrros in the Odyssey is 
the name of the Nile (masc.) as well as 
of the country (fem.). The Arabs pre- 
served the classical name of the Nile in 
the proper name En-Nil ^**jl» or Nil- 
o 
Misr jacla y^ 7 the Nile of Misr (Egypt). 

The same word signifies indigo. 1 

The modern Egyptians commonly 
call the river El-Bahr, " the sea," a term 
also applied to the largest rivers, and the 
inundation "the Nile," En-Nil; and the 
modern Arabs call the river Bahr-en-NH, 
" the river Nile." 

Basin of the River. — The Nile system is 
a simple one with three principal divisions: 
(1) the main stream running souj±_to north, 
and fed by the great lakes of East Central 
Africa; (2) the equatorial tributary rivers 
draining the country north-east of the 
Congo basin; (3) the Abyssinian affluents. 
The extent of the basin of the Nile is 
clearly indicated on the map. Its area is 
estimated at 1,107,227 sq. m., which com- 
pares with the 1,425,000 sq. m. area of 
the Congo basin. The smaller basin of 
the longer river is due to its narrowness 
when passing through the Sahara. South- 
ward the basin includes the northern part 
of the plateau between the two " Rift " 
valleys which traverse that part of Africa, 
and also that portion of the Albertine (or 
western) " Rift " valley which lies north 
of the Mfumbiro mountains. That part 
of the plateau within the Nile basin is 
occupied by the Victoria Nyanza and its 
affluents. These affluents drain a compara- 
tively small part of this plateau, which 
stretches south to Lake Nyasa. The most 
remote feeder of the Nile in this direction 
does not extend farther than 3 20' S. 
West and W.S.W. of Victoria Nyanza, 
however, the Nile basin reaches 3 50' S. 
(264 m. south of the equator) and 20° 15' E., 
following the crest of the hills which 
dominate the north-eastern shores of Lake 
Tanganyika and the eastern shores of 
Lake Kivu. Turning north-westward from 
this point the Nile basin crosses the 
mountainous region of Mfumbiro and in- 
cludes that of Ruwenzori. Its limit is 
marked by the western wall of the 

	1 "En-Nil is the river (lit. the inundation) 
	of Egypt : Es-Saghanl says — * But as to the 
	nil [indigo] with which one dyes, it is an 
	Indian word Arabicized ' " (The Misbdh of 
	ELFayumi). 

Albertine Rift valley, in which lie the Albert Edward and 
Albert Nyanzas. For a considerable distance the water-parting 
between the Congo and the Nile is close to the Albert Nyanza 
and to the Nile as it flows from that lake, but not far north 
of Wadelai (2 46' N.) the hills recede and the Nile basin 
expands westward, over the wide area drained by the Bahr- 
el-Ghazal and its tributaries. In this region there is no well- 
marked watershed between the Congo and Nile systems, which 
interlace. Farther north the limit of the valley is marked by 
the hills of Darfur. Below that point the valley of the Nile 
extends but a mile or two into the desert. 

The south-eastern limits of the Nile basin extend nearly to 
the western escarpment of the eastern Rift valley — the dividing 
plateau being a narrow one. North of the equator a bend is 
made westward to Mt. Elgon, which on the north-east sends 
its water towards Lake Rudolf. From Mt. Elgon the Nile 
watershed is some distance to the west of that lake, while to its 
north a turn is made again, the watershed including a great part 
of the Abyssinian highlands. Beyond 15 N. it follows a line 
generally parallel to the west shore of the Red Sea, except where 
diverted to the west by the basin of the Khor Baraka. 

Sources of the Nile. — The question of the sources of the Nile opens 
up a time-honoured controversy (see under Story of Discovery below). 
Victoria Nyanza (q.v.) is the great reservoir whence issues the Nile 
on its long journey to .the Mediterranean. But if the source of the 
river be considered to be the most remote headstream (measured by 
the windings of the stream), the distinction belongsto one of the 
upper branches of the Kagera. Among the feeders of Victoria Nyanza 
the Kagera is by far the most important, both for length of course 
and volume of water carried, draining the region of greatest rainfall 
round Lake Victoria. Three chief branches unite to form the Kagera, 
and of these the most important for the volume of water carried is 
said to be the Nyavarongo. The Nyavarongo is formed by the 
union of various mountain streams, the Rukarara and the Mhogo 
being the chief. The Rukarara rises in about 2 20' S., 29 20' E., 
at an elevation of some 7000 ft., in a picturesque and bracing region 
immediately east of the Albertine Rift valley. The Nyavarongo first 
flows north to about i° 40' S., then turning in a sharp bend east and 
south, and on again reaching 2° 20' S., unites with the Akanyaru 
just west of 30 ° E. The Akanyaru, which comes from the south- 
west, has been sometimes considered the larger stream, but according 
to Dr Richard Kandt it carries decidedly less water, while its course 
is shorter than that of the Nyavarongo. The combined stream 
takes an easterly and southerly direction, flowing in a swamp valley 
and joining a little west of 31 ° E. the third branch of the Kagera, 
the Ruvuvu, coming from the south. The source of the Ruvuvu is 
in about 2° 55' S., 29J E., but its most southern tributary, and the 
most distant stream sending its waters towards the Nile, is the 
Lavironza. The Lavironza rises in about 3 45' S., 29 ° 50' E., and 
flows north-east, joining the Ruvuvu, which has hitherto had an 
easterly direction, in about 30 25' E., 3 10' S. From this point the 
Ruvuvu flows east and north to its junction with the Nyavarongo. 
From this confluence the combined stream of the Kagera flows north 
and north-west in a level valley strewn with small lakes until almost 
i° S., when it turns east, and finally empties itself into Victoria 
Nyanza just north of i° S., the mouth forming a small projecting 
delta. Its lower course is navigable by shallow draught steamers. 
The total length of the Kagera, reckoning from the source of the 
Nyavarongo, is some ^30 m. Its volume is stated to vary between 
21,000 and 54,000 cub. ft. per second. All the other feeders of 
Victoria Nyanza are small and often intermittent rivers, the largest 
being probably the Nzoia, which enters on the north-east from the 
plateaus south of Mount Elgon. (The rivers which enter Albert 
Edward and Albert Nyanzas and, with those lakes, form the western 
sources of the Nile, are dealt with under Albert Nyanza and Albert 
Edward Nyanza.) 

The Victoria or Somerset Nile. — The ridge of high land which forms 
the northern shore of Victoria Nyanza is broken at its narrowest 
part, where the pent-up waters of the lake — through which a drift 
from the Kagera inlet to the Nile outlet is just perceptible — have 
forced a passage at the northern end of a beautiful bay named 
Napoleon Gulf. At this spot, 30 m. north of the equator, at an alti- 
tude of 3704 ft.,the Nile issues from the lake between cliffs 200 and 
more ft. high with a breadth of some 500 yds. The scene is one of 
much grandeur. The escaping water precipitates itself over a rocky 
ledge with a clear fall of i6£ ft. The falls, some 300 yds. across, 
and divided into three channels by two small wooded islands, are 
.named the Ripon Falls, after Earl de Grey and Ripon (afterwards 
1st marquess of Ripon), president of the Royal Geographical Society 
in 1859. The Victoria or Somerset Nile, as this section is called, has 
at first the character of a mountain stream, racing swiftly through a 
rocky channel often walled in by cliffs (at times 180 ft. high) and 
broken by picturesque islands and countless rapids. It receives the 
waters of several streams, which, rising within a few miles of the 
Victoria Nyanza, flow north. For 133 m. its course is N.N.W., 
when, on being joined by the river Kafu (on which Fort Mruli stands), 
about i° 39' N., 32 ° 20' E., it takes the north-east direction of that 
channel, and it is not till 2° N. that the river again turns westward 
towards the Albert Nyanza. Seventy miles below the Ripon Falls 
the Nile enters a marshy lake of irregular outline, running mainly 
east and west, and known as Kioga (or Choga). The current of the 
Nile is clearly discernible along the western shore of this lake, which 
is 3514 ft. above the sea. Eastwards the lake breaks into several 
long arms, which receive the waters of other lakes lying on the plain 
west of Mount Elgon. One of these, named Lake Salisbury, lies in 
i° 40' N. and 34 E.; east of this lake and connected with it is Lake 
Gedge. Lake Kioga also receives the Mpologoma, a river which 
rises in the foothills of Elgon and flows east and north, attaining 
a width of i£ m.; and from the south (west of the Nile) a broad 
lacustrine river, the Seziwa. The Kioga lake system, lying north of 
the ridge which separates it from Victoria Nyanza, owes its formation 
in part to the waters pouring down from the Nyanza, and is in the 
nature of a huge Nile backwater. The lake itself is rarelyrnore than 
20 ft. deep; its greatest length is 85 m. ; its greatest width 10 m. 
Below Mruli, the fall in the bed levels of the Nile, which up to this 
point has been comparatively gradual, increases considerably. At 
Karuma, where the western bend to the Albert Nyanza is made, 
the river falls over a wall-like ledge of rock, 5 ft. high, which extends 
across its bed. But the great feature of the Victoria Nile are the 
Murchison Falls (named by Sir Samuel Baker, their discoverer, after 
Sir Roderick Murchison, the geologist), situated in 2 18' N. and 
31 ° 50' E. At this point the river rages furiously through a rock- 
bound pass, and, plunging through a cleft less than 18 ft. wide, leaps 
about 130 ft. into a spray-covered abyss. Downstream from these 
falls the river flows for some \± m. between steep forest-covered 
hills, a wide and noble stream with a current so slow and steady that, 
at certain seasons, it is only from the scarcely perceptible drifting 
of the green water-plants called Pistia Stratiotes that it can be 
observed. About 24 m. below the Murchison Falls and 254 m. 
from the Victoria Nyanza the river enters, through a wide delta, 
and across a formidable bar, the N.E. end of Albert Nyanza. In its 
passages from the one lake to the other the Nile falls altogether 
about 1400 ft. Taking its name from a fort which once existed 
there, the delta district is known as Magungo. 

From Albert Nyanza to the Plains. — Issuing from the north-west 
corner of Albert Nyanza some 5 m. from the spot where it entered 
that lake, the Nile, which is now known as the Bahr-el-Jebel, or 
Mountain river, flows in a generally northerly direction. As far as 
Dufile, 130 m. below Magungo, it has a gentle slope, a deep channel 
and a current generally slight. It forms a series of lake-like reaches 
often studded with reedy islands. .Immediately below Dufile the 
Kuku mountains on the west and the Arju range on the east close in 
upon the- river, which, from an average width of 700 yds., narrows 
to 230 yds. Here the hills cause the stream to make a sharp bend 
from the north-east to the north-west. Four or five miles lower 
down the river widens to 400 yds., and a large island divides the 
stream, the eastern channel carrying the main volume of water. 
This island marks the beginning of the Fola Rapids. At its southern 
end the water falls some 20 ft., and then, like a gigantic mill-race, 
rushes through a gorge 330 ft. long and nowhere more than 52 ft. 
wide, to leap into a deep cavity not more than 40 ft. across. Escaping 
from this cauldron the waters thunder on in a succession of 
rapids, which extend beyond the northern end of the island. In all 
the Fola Rapids are nearly 2 m. long. For the next 80 m. the Nile, 
save for the great volume of water, resembles a mountain torrent, 
its course interrupted by continual rapids. The last of these occurs 
at Bedden, where the river breaks through a line of low hills running 
athwart its channel. One of these hills forms an island in mid- 
stream. Below Bedden various stations are established upon the 
river. Fort Berkeley, in 4 40' N. (on the right bank), is the nearest 
to the rapids. Then follow Rejaf (left bank), Gondokoro (right 
bank) and Lado (left bank), all within 30 m. of one another. A 
striking feature of the scenery at Rejaf is a cone-shaped hill, about 
370 ft. high, crowned by rocks which have the appearance of the 
ruins of an ancient castle. At Gondokoro the Nile is clear of the hill 
country, and enters a vast swamp-like expanse through which it 
flows with a very low slope and a very tortuous channel. 

Between Albert Nyanza and the swamp region the Bahr-el-Jebel 
is joined by many streams. The most important of these affluents 
is the Asua (nearly 200 m. long), which enters the main stream from 
the east in 3 50' N. (19 m. N. of Dufile), but has little water in the 
dry season. The Asua and its subsidiary streams rise on the western 
versant of the Karamojo plateau and among the mountain ranges 
which run off from that plateau to the north-west, the most remote 
head-stream running originally due south. 

The Region of Swamps. — The wide valley which the Nile enters at 
Gondokoro slopes so gradually towards the north that the river falls 
only some 182 ft. in a stretch of 475 m. Through this valley the 
river winds in an extremely tortuous course. Its channel has no 
banks, and the overflow has caused extensive swamps which are 
covered by a mass of papyrus and tall reeds, and are traversed by 
numerous shallow lagoons or " mayyas." The shape of these lagoons 
is constantly altering, as also is that of the channels connecting them 
with the river. About 8 m. below Bor, many of the eastern " spills " 
unite and form a stream of considerable breadth, with a strong 
current. This stream, which is known to the Dinkas as the Atem, 
follows a course generally parallel to the Jebel, being bounded east- 
ward by forest land. Opposite Kanisa (6 46' N.), on the main river, 
the Atem divides into two channels, marshy land extending at this 
point a great distance to the east. The western branch, or Awai, 
rejoins the Jebel near Shambe 7 6' N. The eastern branch or 
Myding continues through the marshes, eventually joining the Bahr- 
el-Zeraf (see below) in its lower course. 

Except for the Atem divergence the Nile, despite the swamps 
through which it passes, maintains a fairly definite course, with a 
considerable depth of water as far as Shambe\ where, to the west, 
is a large lagoon. Five miles lower down the river splits into two 
great channels. That to the left, the main stream, continues to be 
known as Bahr-el-Jebel, but is sometimes called by its Dinka name 
Kir. The right branch, or Bahr-el-Zeraf (Giraffe river), has a more 
easterly direction, and does not rejoin the main river until 50 m. 
below its confluence with the Bahr-el-Ghazal (q.v.). From the point 
of bifurcation the Bahr-el-Jebel flows for 230 m. in a general north- 
westerly direction until it is joined by the Bahr-el-Ghazal coming 
from the south-west. The whole region is a vast expanse of low land 
crossed by secondary channels, and flooded for many miles in the 
rainy season. At the junction of the Bahr-el-Ghazal and the Bahr- 
el-Jebel in 9 29' N. the permanently submerged area is usually 
named Lake No, but the Arabs call it Moghr en-el- Bohur (meeting of 
the rivers). Lake No in the rains covers about 50 sq. m. In the 
Bahr-el-Jebel occur the great accumulations of " sudd " (q.v.), 
masses of floating vegetation which obstruct and, if not removed, 
prevent navigation. The aspect of the river throughout the sudd 
region is monotonous and depressing. On all sides stretch reaches 
of the reed known as um suf or mother of wool (Vossia procera), 
ambach, Bus and papyrus. These grasses rise 15 to 20 ft. above the 
water, so as often to close the view like a thick hedge. The level 
of the flat expanse is broken only at intervals by mounds of earth, 
erected by the white ants and covered with a clump of brushwood or 
trees; the moisture in the air is excessive; mosquitoes and other 
swamp flies swarm in myriads. And yet touches of beauty are not 
wanting. Water-lilies (Nymphaea stellate and Nymphaea Lotus) — 
white, blue and crimson — often adorn the surface of the stream. 
Occasionally the rare and odd-looking whale-headed stork or Balae- 
niceps rex is met with among the reeds, and at night the scene is lit 
up by innumerable fire-flies. 

Tke White Nile. — From the confluence with the Bahr-el-Ghazal 
at Lake No, the main stream, which here takes the name of Bahr-el- 
Abiad, or White river, adopts the easterly course of the tributary 
stream. Forty miles below the point where the Bahr-el-Zeraf 
reunites with the main branch, the Nile receives its first great eastern 
affluent — the Sobat (q.v.), whose head-streams rise in the mountains 
of south-west Abyssinia and the region north of Lake Rudolf. 
Just above the Sobat junction the Nile resumes its northern course. 
It passes through a great alluvial plain, stretching from the spurs of 
the Abyssinian highlands in the east, to the hilly districts of Kordofan 
in the west, and covered with high grass and scattered bush. The 
swamps still bound it on either bank, but the river again flows 
in a well-marked channel with defined banks. About 56 m. below 
the Sobat mouth, in o° 55' N., lies (on the left bank) Fashoda (re- 
named in 1904 Kodok), an Egyptian town founded in 1867 on the site 
of Denab, the old " capital " of the Shilluks, and famous for the 
crisis between England and France in 1898 through its occupation 
by the French officer Marchand. For the next 270 m. the scenery is 
very monotonous. The river flows in a wide channel between broad 
swamps bordered by a belt of forest on either bank. At Abu Zeid 
(about 13 5' N.) for a distance of nearly 4 m. the river is extremely 
broad and shallow, being fordable at low water. Fifteen miles lower 
down, at Goz Abu Goma — which is the northern limit of the sudd 
vegetation — the river is divided into two channels by Abba Island, 
wooded, narrow and 28 m. long. On Abba Island lived, for some 
years before 1881, Mahommed Ahmed, the Mahdi. 

The Blue Nile. — Five hundred and twenty miles below the Sobat 
mouth and 1652 m. from Ripon Falls, in 15° 37' N., the White Nile 
is joined by its greatest eastern confluent the Bahr-el-Azrak or Blue 
Nile. In the fork of the two rivers stands Khartum, 1 the capital of 
the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, whilst on the western bank of the White 
Nile is Omdurman, the former Mahdist capital. The Blue Nile, or 
Abai as it is called in Abyssinia, rises in the Gojam highlands in 
ii° N. and 37 E. t and flowing northwards 70 m. enters Lake Tsana 
(q.v.) near its south-west corner, to issue again at the south-eastend. 
The Abai and its tributaries drain a great part of the Abyssinian 
plateau. The complicated river system is best understood by a study 
of the map. The Abai itself on leaving Lake Tsana makes a great 
semicircular sweep S.E. to N W., from the highlands of Ethiopia to 
the plains of Sennar. In this section of its course its swirling waters 
rush over a long series of cataracts and rapids, descending from a 
height of 5770 ft. at the outlet to about 1400 ft. at Fazokl or Famaka 
(11* 17' N., 35 10' E.), where it crosses the Abyssinian frontier, 
and flows through the plains of Sennar to its confluence with the 
White Nile at Khartum, 1300 ft. above sea-level. Of the tributaries 

	1 At Khartum the water of the one river is of a greenish-grey 
	colour, that of the other is clear and blue, except when in flood, 
	when it gains a chocolate brown from its alluvial burden. 

of the Abai the majority join it on its left bank. The Bashilo, Jamma 
and Muger, which reach the Abai in the order named, drain the 
country east of the main stream between the basins of the Takazze 
and the Hawash. The Guder, with a south to north course, rises 
in the mountains which form the watershed between the Nile and 
the Lake Rudolf basin. Next comes the Didessa, a large stream 
rising near the head- waters of the Baro (the main upper branch of 
the Sobat) and flowing N.W. to the Abai, the confluence being 
in about io° N., 35 40' E. It has an early rise and a long flood 
period, being by far the most important tributary of the Blue Nile. 
The Dabus or Yabus rises about 9 N., 34 ° 30' E., and flowing north 
joins the Abai near the spot where that river breaks through the 
Abyssinian hills. All these affluents are perennial, as is the Bolassa 
or Yesien, a right-hand tributary which reaches the Abai below the 
Yabus. Four miles below Famaka the river is joined on its left bank 
by the auriferous Tumat, an intermittent stream. In Sennar it 
receives on its right bank two considerable tributaries from the 
Abyssinian heights, the Dinder, a very long but not perennial 
stream, and the Rahad, waterless^ in the dry season, copious and 
richly charged with sediment during the rains from June to Sep- 
tember. At this period the discharge of the Blue Nile rises from 
less than 200 to over 10,000 cub. metres per second, thus greatly 
exceeding that of the White Nile itself, which is only about 800 cub. 
metres during the floods above the confluence. The length of the 
Blue Nile is about 850 m. The country, El Gezira, enclosed in the 
triangle formed by the junction of the White and Blue Niles forms 
the most fertile portion of the Sudan. It only requires irrigation to 
render it one of the finest grain-producing areas in the world. 

The Atbara.— Two hundred miles below Khartum — at Ed-Damer 
— the Nile is joined by the last of its tributary streams — the Atbara 
or Bahr-el-Aswad (Black river). The Atbara, some 800 m. long, 
rises in the tableland north of Lake Tsana, being formed by the 
junction of the Angreb, Salaam, Aradeb, Goang and other mountain 
streams. Making its way towards the Nubian plains, the river flows 
in a north-westerly direction, joining, in 14 10 N., 36 E., the Bahr 
Setit or Takazze (see Abyssinia), a river coming from the east and 
having a volume of water as large as, if not larger than, the Atbara. 
The united stream preserves, however, the name of Atbara, and at 
its confluence with the Nile has a breadth in flood time of over 
600 yds. The Atbara and its tributaries, like many of those which 
feed the Blue Nile, rapidly dwindle after the rains into the smallest 
limits. In its lower course the Atbara runs completely dry, but 
higher up water may be foundin deep pools, hollowed out of the 
sand bed of the stream by the river when in flood. These pools are 
full of fish, turtles, crocodiles and hippopotami, which remain im- 
prisoned until the return of the flood. The country comprised 
between the Nile proper, the Atbara and the Blue Nile is identified 
with the island of Meroe of ancient history. 

The Cataracts. — Downstream of the Atbara junction the Nile 
continues its course to the Mediterranean, traversing a distance of 
over 1600 m. without receiving a single tributary on either bank. 
Below Khartum the river makes a great S-shaped bend, "and leaving 
behind the cultivable land pierces the Nubian desert. In its progress 
the volume of water suffers continual diminution from evaporation, 
owing to the extreme dryness of the air. The valley of the river is 
here very narrow, and the desert land in places comes right to the 
water's edge. Elsewhere high and barren cliffs shut in the valley. 
Between Khartum and Wadi Haifa (the northern end of the great 
bend), a distance of over 900 m., occurs a series ol cataracts, known 
as the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th (the 1st cataract is lower down the 
river at Assuan). That first met with on descending the river from 
Khartum is the 6th (or Shabluka) cataract. The river here (53 m. 
below Khartum) is narrow and picturesque. The rapid is 1 1 m. in 
length, in which distance the Nile falls some 20 ft.* After 188 m. 
of smooth water the 5th cataract is reached. It begins 28 m. below 
Berber (a town on the right bank at the head of a caravan route to 
the Red Sea), and with three principal rapids extends for 100 m. — 
the drop in this distance being rather more than 200 ft. At the foot 
of this cataract is the town of Abu Hamed, at the eastern end of 
the middle of the S bend. The 4th cataract begins 60 m. down 
stream from Abu Hamed. It is 69 m. long and has a drop of 160 ft. 
Between the Ath and 3rd cataracts there is a stretch of 194 m. on a 
very gentle slope (t*W) ; This reach constitutes the province of 
Dongola, and here the cultivable land on the western side of the river 
is of greater extent than usual in the desert zone. The 3rd cataract, 
45 m. long, has a drop of some 36 ft. After another smooth reach 
extending 73 m. the 2nd cataract, which ends just above Wadi 
Haifa, the northern frontier town of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, is 
reached. This cataract is 124 m. long and has a fall of 216 ft. 
Between the 2nd cataract and Assuan are 214 m. of smooth water 
with a scarcely perceptible slope, Tshns- The average breadth of 
the river here is 1640 ft. It runs through a sandstone bed, and the 
current is guided in many places by spurs of masonry built by the 
ancient Egyptians. 

Lower River and Delta.— For some distance above Assuan the river 
is studded with islands, including those of Philae and Elephantine. 
The rapids south of the town used to form the 1st cataract, where, 

	* The fall in the river-bed, as given in these pages, is an approxi- 
	mation derived from barometric readings only. 

in a length of 3 m., the river fell i6J ft. Since the completion of the 
great dam and locks at the head of these rapids (Dec. 1902) they 
have to a certain extent disappeared, and a navigable channel has 
been formed. The dam, pierced by 180 sluices, stretches across the 
river — a wall 2000 yds. long and 26 ft. wide at the top. Below the 
water rushes between rocks in many channels (this being the relics 
of the cataract). Upstream from the dam a lake some 100 m. in 
length has been formed. The Assuan Dam was opened on the 10th 
of December 1902 (see under Irrigation). A ladder of four locks on 
the western side of the dam permits navigation between the upper 
and lower reaches. At Assuan the banks of the river are bordered 
by high granite hills. From this point to the apex of the delta the 
length of the Nile is 605 m. with a slope (isfons) even slighter than 
that above Assuan. The valley is comparatively narrow, being an 
almost level depression in a limestone plateau — the area of fertility 
ends where the land ceases to be irrigated by the river. At Edfu, 
68 m. below Assuan, a barrage, known as the Esna barrage, regulates 
the flow of the water, and at Assiut, 274 m. below Edfu, is another 
barrage fulfilling the same purpose. Cairo, the capital of Egypt, is 
built on the eastern bank 01 the Nile 12 m. north of the apex of the 
delta. 

At the beginning of the delta the Nile separates into two channels, 
the Rosetta and the Damietta, which join the Mediterranean at its 
south-east angle. At the bifurcation is a double barrage, by means 
of which the water can be dammed to the height required for forcing 
the river into the canals which irrigate the delta. Of the two 
branches the Damietta is the more easterly. Both are about the 
same length — 146 m. 1 Behind the coast-line, which is low and sandy, 
are a number of salt marshes or lagoons. Whilst the Damietta 
branch is gradually silting up, the Rosetta branch is scouring out 
a wider channel. In time of full flood the depth of the water in 
either branch is about 23 ft. 

Hydrography. — The fertility and prosperity of Egypt and the 
northern part of the Sudan being entirely dependent on the irrigation 
of the land by the waters of the Nile, the variation in the supply at 
different seasons of the year is of vital importance. (In Egypt the 
height of the flood has been recorded annually, as the chief event of 
the year, since at least 3600 b.c.J Above the Sobat confluence the 
Nile traverses a region of heavy rainfall and the water-supply is super- 
abundant. It is from Victoria, Albert and Albert Edward Nyanzas 
and their feeders, and in a lesser degree from the Bahr-el-Ghazal, that 
this river obtains its constant supply of water throughout the year. 
The great lakes and the region of swamps, retaining a large propor- 
tion of the water they receive, act as natural reservoirs and prevent 
the lower Nile from ever running dry in summer. The Abyssinian 
affluents are the chief cause of the Nile flood. In the equatorial 
regions rainfall varies from 30 to 80 in. during the year with a mean 
of about 50. It is heaviest in the months of January, February, 
March and April, and again in October and November. The most 
rainy portions of the lake plateau (where alone occurs a rainfall of 
60 in. and over) lie along the eastern edge of the Albertine Rift 
valley, and west and north of Victoria Nyanza. These rains feed 
Albert Edward and Albert Nyanzas, and, through the Kagera, 
supply a great part of the water of Victoria Nyanza. The water in 
the Victoria Nyanza begins to rise in January, the rise becomes 
marked in June, is at its height in July, the level of the water reaching 
its lowest at the end of November. The Bahr-el-Jebel is at its lowest 
in March and April and at its highest in September. The seasonal 
supply of the Bahr-el-Ghazal does not vary very greatly, the maxi- 
mum levels occurring in November and December. The Ghazal 
has but a slight discharge. The Sobat, from December to March, 
is at its lowest, and is in flood from June to October, during which 
period the water (milky coloured) which it pours into the Nile equals 
in volume that of the main stream. It is the colour of the Sobat 
water which gives its name to the White Nile. The Blue Nile, at 
its confluence at Khartum, begins to rise in June and is in flood from 
July to October; the Atbara is also in flood during the same months. 
The great difference in the supply of water from the equatorial 
regions and from Abyssinia arises from the fact that the first-named 
district is one of heavy rain practically all the year round ; whereas 
in Abyssinia the season of heavy rain is usually limited to the 
months of June to September. Reduced to its simplest expression, 
the Nile system may be said to consist of a great steady flowing river 
fed by the rains of the tropics, controlled by the existence of a vast 
head reservoir and several areas of repose, and annually flooded by 
the^ accession of a great body of water with which its eastern tribu- 
taries are flushed. 

At Khartum the Nile is lowest in April and May and highest in 
August and September. Its minimum depth is 18 ft. and its maxi- 
mum depth 25 ft. At Assuan the Nile is at its lowest at the end of 
May, then rises slowly until the middle of July, and rapidly through- 
out August, reaching its maximum at the beginning of September; 
\t then falls slowly through October and November. At Cairo the 

	1 In ancient times the delta was watered by seven branches; five 
	of these branches are now canals not always navigable. The ancient 
	branches were, beginning at the west, the .Canopic, Bolbitine, 
	Sebennytic, Phatnitic, Mendesian, Tanitic and Pelusiac, of which the 
	modern Rosetta and Damietta branches represent the Bolbitine 
	and Pathnitic. 

lowest level is reached about the middle of June, after which the rise 
is slow in July and fairly rapid in August, reaching the maximum at 
the beginning of October. By using the water stored by the Assuan 
dam in the months following high Nile, the river lower down has been, 
since 1902, replenished at times of low water to meet the needs of 
cultivators (see Irrigation: Egypt). At Assuan the average rise 
of the Nile is 26 ft., at Cairo it is 23 ft. A rise of 21 ft. only at Assuan 
is a " bad Nile " ; on the other hand, a rise of 30 ft. causes a danger 
of flood, or rather it used to do so previous to the building of the 
dam. When the Nile below the swamps is at its lowest, the water 
acquires a green colour and a putrid taste and smell. This is caused 
by innumerable microscopic green algae, which are brought into the 
White Nile from the marshes of the Bahr-el-Jebel and Bahr-el- 
Ghazal, and descend the river when it is clear of all suspended matter. 
This "green water" is seen at Cairo about the end of June or 
beginning of July, and passes away with the first rise in the later 
month, the algae being unable to live in turbid water. By August 
the river in lower Egypt is full of dark red-brown sediment brought 
down by the Blue Nile and the Atbara from the plateaus of Abys- 
sinia. It is estimated to be then carrying 8 cub. yds. per second; 
by September this has been reduced to half the amount, and then 
diminishes rapidly. It has been calculated 1 that the time taken by 
the water to travel from Khartum to the delta barrage varies from 
14 days in September to 42 in May. On the island of Elephantine 
at Assuan is the famous Kilometer, dating from ancient Egyptian 
times, altered and extended in Roman times and repaired in 1870 by 
the Khedive Ismail. It is a well built of hewn stones, marked with 
scales to record the level of the water, which rises and falls with that 
of the river. The remains of other ancient Nilometers exist at Philae, 
Edfu and Esna, together with inscriptions recording about forty 
high Niles in the XXVth Dynasty, discovered on a cmay wall of the 
temple of Karnak. The data furnished by these give about 4 J in. 
per century as the rate at which the Nile is silting up its bed north 
of the 1st cataract. The level of high Nile at the Semna rapids, 
between the 2nd and 3rd cataracts, is 24 ft .lower than that indicated 
by the marks sculptured c. 2500 B.C. This fall is attributed to the 
erosive action of the water as it passes over the hard gneiss which at 
Semna forms a barrier across the stream. The vertical extent of 
such erosion is equal to about two millimetres a year. 

It is noteworthy that from the mouth of the Sobat to the Mediter- 
ranean the current of the Nile is generally deepest and strongest 
on its right (eastern) bank; the Nile in this respect resembling other 
great rivers of the northern hemisphere. The pressure of the water 
on the right bank is attributed to the prevailing N.W. winds.' 

There are now gauges for registering the rise of the water at Cairo, 
Assuan, Berber and Khartum on the main river; at Wad Medani, 
Sennar and Roseires on the Blue Nile; El Duem and Taufikia on 
the White Nile; Nasser on the Sobat; Gondokoro on the Bahr-el- 
Jebel; and Ugowe, Jinja and Entebbe on Victoria Nyanza. 

Navigation, — At high Nile there is uninterrupted water- 
communication from the sea to Fort Berkeley in 4 40' N. — a 
distance of 2900 m. Owing to the cataracts, navigation between 
Assuan and Khartum is impossible during low Nile, and from the 
1 st of March to the 1st of August the upper courses of the 
Damietta and Rosetta branches are closed to navigation; the 
water being utilized for summer irrigation in the delta. As far 
as Mansura (60 m.) on the Damietta branch and Kafr-el-Zayat 
(70 m.) on the Rosetta branch, and between Khartum and Fort 
Berkeley (1090 m.) the river is navigable all the year round, 
though between the Sobat confluence and Bor, navigation is 
dependent on the channel being kept clear of sudd. Above Fort 
Berkeley navigation is interrupted by the rapids and cataracts 
which extend to Dufile, but from the last-named town to Fajao 
at the foot of the Murchison Falls (a distance of 150 m.) the river 
is navigable throughout the year. There is a further navigable 
stretch between Foweira (just above the Karuma rapids) and 
the southern end of Lake Kioga. The Blue Nile is navigable 
for steamers during flood time from its confluence at Khartum 
to Roseires at the foot of the Abyssinian hills, a distance of 
426 m. At low water small boats only can go up stream. The 
Atbara is never navigable, the current during flood time being 
too swift for boats. Including the Sobat and the Bahr-el-Ghazal 
the navigable waters of the Nile and its affluents exceed 4000 m. 

Owing to the cataracts and the partial closing of the Damietta 
and Rosetta branches for irrigation purposes, the Nile helow 
Khartum is subsidiary, as a means of communication, to 
the railways and highroads. 4 Above Khartum the river is 

	1 By Sir Hanbury Brown, inspector-general of irrigation, Lower 
	Egypt, 1892-1903. 

	1 Egyptian Irrigation (p. 29), by Sir W. Willcocks (London, 1899). 

	* Between Assuan (Shellal) and Wadi Haifa the river is, however, 
	the main highway, there being no railway between the places named. 

the chief channel of trade and commerce. Steamers first 
ascended the Nile above the cataracts (to Korosko) in 1820. 
It was not till 1846 that a steamboat was placed on the White 
Nile. (W.E.G.; F. R. C.) 

Story of Discovery. — Few problems in geographical research 
exercised for so long a period so potent an influence over the 
imaginations of man as that of the origin of the Nile. The ancient 
Egyptians, as is apparent from the records on their monuments, 
were acquainted with the main stream as far south as the junction 
of the White and Blue Niles. They appear also to have known 
the Blue Nile up to its source and the White Nile as far south 
as the Bahr-el-Ghazal confluence. Beyond that point the sudd 
probably barred progress. The knowledge acquired by the 
Egyptians passed to the Persians and Greeks. Herodotus (about 
457 B.C.) ascended the Nile as far as the First Cataract. He was 
led to believe that the source of the river was far to the west — 
in the region of Lake Chad. Eratosthenes, superintendent of the 
Alexandrian library, in a map made about 250 B.C., showed, 
with fair accuracy, the course of the river as far as where Khartum 
now stands. He showed also the Atbara and Blue Nile. Eratos- 
thenes was the first writer to hint at equatorial lakes as the 
sources of the river. Juba II., king of Mauretania (who died 
about a.d. 20), in his Libyca, quoted by Pliny, makes the Nile 
rise in western Mauretania, not far from the ocean, in a lake 
presenting characteristic Nile fauna, then pass underground for 
several days' journey to a similar lake in Mauretania Caesariensis, 
again continue underground for twenty days 1 journey to the 
source called Nigris on the borders of Airica and Ethiopia, and 
thence flow through Ethiopia as the Astapus. This remarkable 
story received considerable credence, and may be connected 
with the theory which made the Niger a branch of the Nile (see 
below). Strabo (a contemporary of Juba), who ascended the 
river as far as Syene, states that very early investigators had 
connected the inundation of the Lower Nile with summer rains 
on the far southern mountains, and that their theory had been 
confirmed by the observations of travellers under the Ptolemies. 
About the same time Dalion, a Greek, is believed to have ascended 
the White Nile- Nero despatched two centurions on an ex- 
pedition for the express purpose of exploring the Nile, and Seneca 
states that they reached a marshy impassable region, which may 
be easily identified with the country of the White Nile above the 
mouth of the Sobat. To what they referred when they reported 
a great mass of water falling from between two rocks is not so 
readily determined. During this period more accurate knowledge 
concerning the Nile sources was obtained from the reports of 
Greek traders who visited the settlements on what is now called 
the Zanzibar coast. A merchant named Diogenes returning 
(about a.d. 50) from the east coast of Africa told a Syrian 
geographer, Marinus of Tyre, that journeying inland for twenty- 
five days he reached the neighbourhood of two great lakes and 
a range of snow mountains whence the Nile drew its sources. 
Marinus published this report in his geographical works. This 
book is lost, but the information is incorporated in the writings 
of Ptolemy, who in his book and map sums up all that was 
known or surmised of the Nile in the middle of the 2nd century 
of the Christian era. Ptolemy writes that two streams issuing 
from two lakes 1 (one in 6° and the other in 7 S.) unite in 2 N. 
to make the Nile, which, in 12 N., receives the Astapus, a river 
flowing from Lake Coloe (on the equator). His two southern 
lakes, he conceived, were fed by the melting of snows on a 
range of mountains running east and west for upwards of 500 m. 
— the Mountains of the Moon, rd tt}s ceXijvrjs 6pos, Lunae 
Monies. It will be seen that, save for placing the sources too 
far to the south, Ptolemy's statements were a near approximation 
to the facts. The two southern lakes may be identified with 
Victoria and Albert Nyanzas, and Lake Coloe with Lake Tsana. 
The snow-capped range of Ruwenzori occupies — at least in part — 
the position assigned to the Mountains of the Moon, with which 
chain Kilimanjaro and Kenya may also be plausibly identified. 
On all the subsequent history of the geography, of the Nile 

	1 The two lakes afterwards received the names Lake of Crocodiles 
	and Lake of Cataracts. 

Ptolemy's theory had an enormous influence. Medieval maps 
and descriptions, both European and Arabian, reproduce the 
Mountains of the Moon and the equatorial lakes with a variety of 
probable or impossible modifications. Even Speke (see below) 
congratulated himself on identifying the old Ptolemian range 
with the high lands to the north of Tanganyika, and connected 
the name with that of Unyamwezi, the " country of the moon." 

In the fourteen centuries after Ptolemy virtually nothing was 
added to the knowledge of the geography of the Upper Nile. 
Arab writers of the 12 th and 13th centuries make mention of the 
great lakes, and their reports served to revive the interest of 
Europe in the problem of the Nile. Idrisi made both the Nile 
and the Niger issue from a great lake, the Niger flowing west, 
the Nile north. Hence arose much confusion, th? Senegal 
estuary being regarded by its discoverers (1445) as the mouth of 
a western branch of the Nile. Even until the early years of the 
19th century the belief persisted in a connexion between the Nile 
and the Niger (see further Niger). Portuguese explorers and 
missionaries, who in the 15th and 16th centuries visited the east 
coast of Africa and Abyssinia, gained some information about 
the equatorial lake region and the Nile, 2 the extent of the know- 
ledge thus acquired being shown in the map of Africa of Filippo 
Pigafetta, Italian traveller and historian (1 533-1603) published 
in 1580. It was not, however, till the 17th century that the 
sources of the Blue Nile were visited by Europeans. In 161 5 
Pedro Paez, a Portuguese priest, was shown them by the 
Abyssinians. Ten years later another Portuguese priest, 
Jeronimo Lobo, also visited the sources and left a vivid descrip- 
tion of the rise of the river and its passage through Lake Tsana. 
An English version of the accounts of Paez and Lobo — written by 
Sir Peter Wyche — was published in 1669 by order of the Royal 
Society, of which Sir Peter was an original Fellow. Between 
1625 (the date of Lobo's visit) and 1770, some attempts were 
made by French and other travellers to explore the Blue Nile, but 
they ended in failure. In the last-named year James Bruce (q.v.) 
reached Abyssinia, and in November 1772 he arrived in Egypt, 
having visited the source of the Blue Nile and followed it, in 
the main, to its confluence with the White Nile. On returning 
to Europe Bruce was mortified to find that whilst he was still in 
Egypt the French geographer D'Anville had (1772) issued a new 
edition of his map of Africa in which by a careful study of the 
writings of Paez and Lobo he had anticipated Bruce's discoveries, 
D'AnvihVs map is singularly accurate, if we remember the 
scanty information at his disposal. To Bruce, nevertheless, 
belongs the honour of being the first white man to trace the 
Blue Nile to its confluence with the White Nile. He himself, 
considering that £he Blue Nile was the main branch of the river, 
claimed to be the discoverer of the long-sought caput Nili* 

From the time of Bruce, interest in the Nile problem grew 
rapidly. The Englishman W. G. Browne (q.v.) when in Darfur 
(1 794-1 796) heard that the Abiad rose far south in the Mountains 
of the Moon, but he makes no mention of the great lakes, and in 
Major RennelTs map of 1802 there is no hint of equatorial lakes 
at the Abiad sources. During the French occupation of Egypt 
the river from the sea to Assuan was accurately surveyed, the 
results being embodied in Jaco tin's Atlas de V£gypte (1807). 
In 1812-1814 J. L. Burckhardt, the Orientalist, went up the 
Nile to Korosko, travelled thence across the desert to Berber 
and Shendi, and crossing the Atbara made his way to the Red 
Sea. It was, however, due to the initiative of Mehemet Ali, 
Pasha of Egypt, that the While Nile was explored. In 1820- 
22 a military expedition under Ismail Pasha, a son of Mehemet 
Ali, which was joined by the French scientist Frederic Cailliaud 
(who had visited Meroe in 1819) ascended the river to the 

	a Francisco Alvarez, a priest, who was in Abyssinia 1520-1526, 
	afterwards wrote (about 1550) an account of Abyssinia in which he 
	refers to the Atbara as the main Nile. 

	* Bruce, however, acknowledged in his Travels that the Abiad 
	(White Nile) at its confluence with the Blue Nile was the larger river. 
	The Abiad, he writes, " preserves its stream always undiminished, 
	because rising in latitudes where there are continual rains, it 
	therefore suffers not the decrease the Nile does by the six months' dry 
	weather." 

confluence of the White and Blue Niles, founded the city of 
Khartum, and ascended the Blue Nile to Fazokl. In 1827 Adolphe 
Linant, a Belgian in the service of the British African Association, 
ascended the White Nile 132 m. above Khartum, being the first 
white man to do so since the 1st century a.d. Then followed 
three Egyptian expeditions sent in 1830-41 and 1842 by 
Mehemet Ali up the White Nile. The first expedition reached, 
on the 28th of January 1840, a point 6° 30' N., the second and 
third pressed further south, reaching 4 42' N. — or the foot of the 
rapids above Gondokoro. A Turkish officer, Seb'm Bimbashi, 
commanded the expeditions, and among the members were the 
Frenchmen Thibaut (a convert to Islam and for nearly forty 
years French consular agent at Khartum), D'Amaud and 
Sabatier, and a German, Ferdinand Werne. The last-named 
wrote a scientific account of the second expedition and drew 
a map of the Nile between Khartum and Gondokoro. An 
Austrian Roman Catholic mission was established in the Sudan, 
and in 1850 one of its members, Dr Ignatz Knoblecher, sent to 
Europe reports, gleaned from the natives, of the existence of 
great lakes to the south. About the same time two Protestant 
missionaries, Ludwig Krapf and John Rebmann, stationed on the 
Zanzibar coast, sent home reports of a vast inland sea in the 
direction where the Nile sources were believed to be. This sea 
was supposed to extend from o° 30' N. to 13 30 ' S. These 
reports revived interest in Ptolemy's Geography. The exploration 
of the Bahr-el-Ghazal by John Petherick, Miss Tinne and her 
companions, and others followed the opening up of the White Nile 
(see Bahr-el-Ghazal). The general result of the work carried 
on from the north was that by 1858 the Nile system was known 
as far south as the rapids at Bedden. 

On the 3rd of August 1858 the English explorer J. H. Speke 
(q.v.) discovered the large nyanza (lake), which he rightly con- 
ceived to be the head reservoir of the White Nile, and which in 
honour of the queen of England he named Victoria Nyanza. 
Captain (Sir Richard) Burton and Speke had gone inland from 
Zanzibar to investigate the reports concerning the vast lake 
which Rebmann and Krapf had called the Sea of Unyamwezi. 
These reports proved \o be- exaggerated accounts of three dis- 
tinct lakes — Nyasa, Tanganyika and Victoria Nyanza. In 
i860 Speke returned to Zanzibar accompanied by J. A. Grant 
(q.v.)y bent on solving the problem of the Nile. In spite of great 
difficulties he made his way to Uganda, on the north-west of 
Victoria Nyanza, and (without exploring the lake) succeeded 
in reaching its outlet. On the 28th of July 1862 Speke stood by 
the Ripon Falls — the birthplace of the Nile. In his journey he 
had discovered the Kagera river, now known to he the most 
remote headstream of the Nile, a fact of which Speke was un- 
certain, though he recognized that it was the largest river entering 
the nyanza. Speke and Grant paddled down the Nile a short 
distance, but before reaching Lake Kioga they were stopped 
by hostile natives and compelled to go westward to Unyoro. 
There they heard of another great lake further west, but the king 
of Unyoro refused them permission to visit it. In the end they 
descended the Kafu river to its confluence with the Nile and then 
down the main stream to the Karuma Rapids. Here Speke and 
Grant left the river, and travelled overland east of the stream, 
which they did not stiike again until just above the Ausa con- 
fluence. Thence they travelled down the Nile to Gondokoro, 
reached on the 15th of February 1863. 

This remarkable journey virtually solved the Nile problem so 
far as the source of the main stream was concerned, hut there re- 
mained much to be done before the hydrography of the whole Nile 
basin was made known. At Gondokoro Speke and Grant met 
Mr (afterwards Sir Samuel) Baker 1 and his wife — a Hungarian 
lady — who had journeyed thither to afford the explorers help. 
To Baker Speke communicated the news he had heard con- 
cerning the western lake, and this lake Baker determined to find. 
On the 26th of March 1863 Baker and his wife left Gondokoro, 
and despite much opposition, especially from slave-dealers, 
followed, in the reverse direction, the route of Speke and Grant as 

	1 Baker and his wife had in 1861-1862 explored the Atbara (to its 
	upper waters) and other eastern tributaries of the Nile. 

far as Unyoro, whence they journeyed west. On the 14th of March 
1864 they struck the lake (Albert Nyanza) on its S.E. side. 
They paddled up the lake to the point where a large river coming 
from the east poured its waters into the lake. This stream, 
which they rightly conjectured to be Speke's Nile, they followed 
up to the Murchison Falls. Thence they went overland to the 
Karuma Rapids, and so back to Gondokoro by their old tracks. 
It fell to the lot of General C. G. Gordon (when that officer 
administered the Egyptian Equatorial provinces) and his 
assistants to fill up the gap left by Speke and Baker in the course 
of the main stream. In 1874-75 two English engineer officers — 
Lieut, (afterwards Colonel Sir Charles M.) Watson and Lieut. H. 
Chippendall — followed the river between Gondokoro and Albert 
Nyanza; in 1876 an Italian, Romolo Gessi Pasha, circum- 
navigated that lake, proving Baker's estimate of its size to be 
vastly exaggerated; Gordon in the same year traced the river 
between Murchison Falls and Karuma Rapids, and an American, 
Colonel C. Chaille-Long followed (1874) the Nile from the Ripon 
Falls to the Karuma Rapids, discovering in his journey Lake 
Kioga (which he named Ibrahim). In this manner the identity 
of the Victoria Nile with the river whicb issued from the Albert 
Nyanza was definitely established. 

In 1874 H. M. Stanley (q.v.) went to Africa with the object of 
completing the work left unfinished by David Livingstone, 
who believed, erroneously, that the ultimate sources of the Nile 
were far to the south (see Congo). Stanley, in 1875, circum- 
navigated Victoria Nyanza, setting at rest the doubt thrown 
on Speke's statement that it was a huge sheet of water, 2 but 
proving Speke mistaken in believing the nyanza to have more 
than one outlet. On the same journey Stanley encamped at the 
foot of the Ruwenzori range, not knowing that they were the 
" Mountains of the Moon," whose streams are the chief feeders of 
Albert Nyanza. (At the time of his visit the snow-peaks and 
glaciers were hidden by heavy clouds.) In 1888, however, 
Stanley saw the .mountains in all their glory of snow and ice, 
discovered Albert Edward Nyanza, and traced the river (Semliki) 
which connects it with Albert Nyanza. The Semliki had been 
discovered, and its lower course followed in 1884 by Emin Pasha. 
Thus at length the riddle of the Nile was read, though much was 
still to do in the matter of scientific survey, and in the exploration 
of the valley of the Sobat (q.v.). The Kagera had been partly ex- 
plored by Stanley (1875), by whom it was called the Alexandra 
Nile, and between 1891-98 its various branches were traced 
by the German travellers Oscar Baumann, Richard Kandt 
and Captain H. Ramsay, and by Lionel Decle, a Frenchman. 
A British officer, Colonel C. DelmeVRadcliffe, made the first 
accurate survey (1900-1901) of the Nile between Albert Nyanza 
and Gondokoro. In 1903 an Anglo-German commission under 
Colonel Delme-Radcliffe and Captain Schlobach made a detailed 
survey of the Kagera from 30 E. to its mouth. The Kioga 
system was surveyed in 1 907-1 908 by Lieut. C. E. Fishbourne. 
A trigonometrical survey of the upper river was begun by Colonel 
M. G. Talbot, director of Sudan surveys, in 1900, and other 
surveys were made by Captain H. G. Lyons, director-general of 
the Egyptian survey department. A fish-survey of the waters of 
the Nile was also undertaken. 

The Removal of Sudd. — As already stated, the sudd above the Sobat 
confluence seems to have stopped the Roman centurions sent by the 
emperor Nero to explore the Nile. When the river above the Sobat 
was again reached by white men (1840) the stream was clear of sudd, 
and so continued until 1 863-1 864, when both the Bahr-cl-Jebel and 
the Bahr-el-Zeraf became blocked by floating masses of vegetation. 
When Baker proceeded to Gondokoro in 1870 he thus described the 
increase that neglect had caused in the obstruction: " The immense 
number of floating islands that were constantly passing down the 
stream of the While Nile had no exit; thus they were sucked under 
the original obstruction by the force of the stream, which passed 
through some mysterious channel, until the subterranean passage 
became choked with a wondrous accumulation of vegetable matter. 
The entire river became a marsh, through which, by the great pressure 
of water, the stream oozed through innumerable small channels. 
In fact, the White Nile had disappeared.'* Baker, who had to cut 
through 50 m. of sudd in his passage to Gondokoro, urged to Khedive 

	1 In the map issued in 1873 to illustrate Schweinfurth's book, 
	The Heart of Africa, Victoria Nyanza is shown as five small lakes. 

Ismail to reopen the Nile. ^ This work was efficiently done by Ismail 
Aynb Pasha, and the White Nile was clear for large vessels when 
Gordon reached Khartum in 1874. The river did not long remain 
free, for in 1878 Emin Pasha was unable to ascend the Bahr-el-Jebel 
from the south on account of sudd. It was cleared in 1879-1880 by 
officials in the Egyptian service, but had again accumulated in 1884. 
In consequence of the Mahdist movement nothing could then be 
done to clear the river, and the work was not taken in hand again 
until 1899, when, by direction of Sir William Garstin, the Egyptian 
inspector-general of irrigation, an expedition under Major Malcom 
Peake, R.A., was sent to cut through the sudd, which then extended 
from the Bahr-el-Ghazal confluence almost to Gondokoro. During 
1900 a channel was cut through the northern and heaviest portion 
of the sudd. The work was one of much difficulty, some of the blocks 
bein^ 1 m. long and 20 ft. deep ; the water beneath flowed with great 
velocity. To remove the obstruction the surface wa3 first burnt; 
then trenches were cut dividing the sudd into blocks 10 ft. square, 
and each of these was hauled out with wire hawsers and chains 
by gunboats working from below. For a distance of 172 m. N. of 
Shambe (i.e. about midway between the Ghazal confluence and 
Gondokoro) the true bed of the river could not, in many places, be 
found, but Major Peake forced a passage to Gondokoro through a 
snill channel or series of shallow lakes lying west of the main stream. 
In 1901 Lieut. Drury, a British naval officer, removed many of the 
remaining blocks of sudd, opening to navigation a further 147 m. 
of the river. Beyond this point for a distance of 25 m.the Bahr-el- 
Jebel could not be traced, so completely was the channel choked by 
sudd. In 1902, however, Major G.E.Matthews discovered the true 
bed of the river, which by 1904 was completely freed from obstruc- 
tions, and freedom of navigation between Khartum and Gondokoro 
was permanently secured. The effect of the sudd-cutting operations 
on the supply of water available for irrigation purposes in the lower 
river was slight. Nevertheless, Sir William Garstin reported that 
the removal of the sudd " undoubtedly checked the fall in the river 
levels which would otherwise have taken place/' 

Political Relations. — Explored in part by Egyptian government 
expeditions, the upper Nile as far south as Albert Nyanza became 
subject, between 1840 and 1882, to Egypt. Possession of the greater 
part of the river above Wadi Haifa then fell to the followers of the 
Mahdi. In 1896-98 an^ Anglo-Egyptian army reconquered the 
country, and from Victoria Nyanza to the Mediterranean the main 
river came under British or Egyptian administration. The west 
bank of the Bahr-el-Jebel, as far north as 5 30' N., was in 1894 taken 
on lease from Great Britain by the Congo Free State during the 
sovereignty of Leopold II., the territory leased being known as the 
Lado enclave (q.v.). The Kagera, the main headstream, lies almost 
wholly in German East Africa. 

Authorities. — For the story of exploration see the works of 
Bruce, Speke, Grant, Baker and other travellers (whose books arc 
mentioned in the biographical notices). Their achievements, and 
those of ancient and medieval explorers, are ably summarized in 
The Story of Africa, vols. ii. and iii.,by Dr Robert Brown (London, 
1893-1894), and The Nile Quest, by Sir Harry Johnston (London, 
1903). See also J. Partsch, Des AristoteVs Buck: "Uber das 
Steigen des Nil " (Leipzig, 1909). For the Kagera region consult 
Caput Nili, by Richard Kandt (Berlin, 1904). Latest additions to 
geographical knowledge are recorded in the Geographical Journal 
(London) and the Cairo Scientific Journal. For the hydrography, 
geology and climate see : The Physiography of the River Nile and tts 
Basin, by Captain H. G. Lyons, director-general, survey department, 
Egypt (Cairo, 1906), an authoritative work, and numerous other 
publications of the Survey and Public Works Departments; " Notes 
on the History of the Nile and its Valley," by W. F. Hume, in Geog. 
JnL (Jan. 1906); Egyptian Irrigation (2nd ed., London, 1899) and 
the Nile Reservoir Dam at Assuan and After (London, 1901), both 
by Sir William Willcocks; the Annual Reports (1899 and after) of 
the Egyptian Public Works Department, by Sir William Garstin and 
others, and those on Egypt and the Sudan by Lord Cromer and Sir 
Eldon Gorst (London; official publications). Of special value is the 
Blue Book Egypt No. 2, 1904, which is a report by Sir William Garstin 
on the basin of the upper Nile, dealing at length with the lake area, 
the Nile affluents and the main river as far south as Khartum, 
from the topographical as well as the hydrographical aspect. Sir 
W. Garstin and Captain Lyons give full bibliographical notes. 

The study of the zoology of the Nile valley was the special object 
of a Swedish scientific expedition in 1901, under the direction of 
Prof. L. A. Jagerskiold. The Results were published at Upsala, 
pt. iii. appearing in 1909. For the botanical and other aspects of 
the Nile valley, see the works of Pctherick, Heuglin, Schweinfurth, 
Junker and Emin. An orographical map of the Nile basin was pub- 
lished by the Survey Department, Cairo, in 1908. It »s in six sheets 
on a scale of 1 12,500,000, with inset maps showing political divisions, 
distribution of rainfall and of vegetation. (F. R. C.) 


NILE, BATTLE OF THE. This was fought between the British 
and French fleets on the 1st of August 1798 in the roadstead of 
Aboukir. The peace of Campo Formio, signed on* the 17th of 
October 1797, had left France without an opponent in arms on 
the continent. War with Great Britain still continued, and for 
a time the Directory appeared to be intent on its schemes for 
an invasion of Ireland. Napoleon, fresh from his Italian vic- 
tories, was appointed to command, and he made a round of 
inspection of Brest and the Channel ports. But all this show of 
activity was designed to cover the preparations for an attack on 
Great Britain " from behind " — in India and by way of Egypt. 
The French naval forces at Toulon were got ready slowly in spite of 
Napoleon's urging and with the defects inevitable in the impover- 
ished state of the arsenal. Thirty-six thousand soldiers, including 
the best of the army of Italy, were to be embarked from the 
southern French ports, from Italy and from Corsica. Information 
that a great offensive movement was about to be made by the 
French reached both Earl St Vincent, the commander-in-chief of 
the Mediterranean fleet, and the British government. Since Spain 
had entered into alliances with France in 1796, the British fleet 
had not cruised in the Mediterranean but had been occupied 
in blocking the Spanish ships at Cadiz. On the 2nd of May 1798 
St Vincent detached Nelson, then the junior rear-admiral, with 
his flag into the Mediterranean, with three sail of the line and 
frigates to make a reconnaissance at Toulon. On the 17th of 
May a small French corvette was captured near Cape Side, 
and from the crew Nelson learnt that the French were still in the 
harbour. He could gain no information as to the aim of the 
armament. Napoleon enforced strict secrecy by not letting 
even the most important officers of the dockyard know whither 
he was bound. On the 2nd of May the British government had 
written to St Vincent stating their wish that a part of his fleet 
should be sent into the Mediterranean. The first lord of the 
admiralty, Lord Spencer, told him that he might either go him- 
self or send a subordinate. If the latter course was followed 
Nelson was indicated as the officer to be chosen. Reinforcements 
were sent to him to enable him to provide both for the cruise in the 
Mediterranean and for the blockade of Cadiz. St Vincent had 
already selected Nelson, and when the reinforcements arrived 
he despatched Captain Troubridge with the inshore squadron 
engaged in watching Cadiz — " the choice fellows," as he described 
them, of his fleet — to join Nelson at Toulon. The ships were 
replaced by others similarly painted, so that the Spaniards might 
see no difference and therefore be unable to send news to their 
ally. Troubridge left on the 24th of May with as many vessels 
as would bring Nelson's whole command up to thirteen 74's 
and one 50-gun ship. 

While these measures were being taken to intercept him, 
Napoleon had put to sea on the 19th of May with fifteen sail of 
the line, twelve frigates and some two hundred transports. 
He sailed down the eastern side of Corsica and Sardinia to pick 
up the detachments which were to join him from the first-named 
island and from Civita Vecchia. On the evening of the 20th 
a gale from the N.W. brought some confusion on his flock of 
ships, but it also drove Nelson to the S.W. His flagship the 
" Vanguard " (74) was dismasted and compelled to anchor at 
San Pietro to refit. His frigates were separated from him by the 
weather, and the captains made for Gibraltar, concluding that 
the admiral would go there to refit. The departure of his frigates 
left Nelson without vessels for scouting and had a material in- 
fluence on the campaign. The " Vanguard " was made ready 
by the 27th of May, and resumed her station off Toulon. On 
the 7th of June Nelson was joined by Troubridge. Calms 
hampered his pursuit of the French, whom he now knew to be 
at sea, but on the 14th he was off Civita Vecchia; on the 17th 
he was at Naples, where he heard that the French had been seen 
going south, and made arrangements to obtain water and stores 
in the Neapolitan ports. On the 20th he was at Messina, where 
he first got definite information of the movements of the enemy. 
The French had appeared off Malta on the 9th and had occupied 
the island, which was surrendered to them on the 12th by the 
treachery of the French and Italian members of the order. Push- 
ing on in the hope of finding them on the coast of the island, 
Nelson was off Cape Passaro on the 22nd, and there learnt that 
the French had sailed from the island. His instructions directed 
him to guard against possible French attacks on Sicily, or even 
an attempt to pass the Straits of Gibraltar and sail for Ireland. 

But Nelson knew that the Neapolitan government had no fears 
for Sicily and that the westerly winds would prevent the French 
from going to Gibraltar. On a view of all the circumstances, 
and after consultation with those of his captains in whose judg- 
ment he had the most confidence, he came to the just conclusion 
that they were bound for Egypt. He therefore sailed for Alex- 
andria on the most direct route eastward along the coast of Africa. 
The information given him at Cape Passaro was that the French 
had left Malta on the 16th; the actual date was the 19th. 
Napoleon, whose frigates - had sighted the British squadron, 
and who knew that he might be pursued, did not take the direct 
route, but steered to the north-east along the south shore of 
Crete. Thus it happened that on the night of the 22nd of June 
the fleets crossed one another's tracks. Want of look-out vessels 
prevented Nelson from detecting the neighbourhood of his 
enemy. The French with their convoy going more slowly on 
the longer route to the north, and the active British squadron 
on the direct route to the south, both headed for Egypt, with 
barely 60 m. of sea between them, but neither aware of .the 
position of the other. 

On the 28th of June Nelson reached Alexandria to find the 
port occupied only by a few Turkish ships. It was from Nelson 
that the Turkish authorities gained their first knowledge of the 
impending invasion. Nelson, misled by the false date given him 
at Cape Passaro, and being unable to reconnoitre the position 
of the enemy, came to the erroneous conclusion that he was 
mistaken in supposing that the French were on the way to Egypt, 
and that they must be bound for some other part of the eastern 
Mediterranean. On the 29th of June he sailed from Alexandria, 
standing to the' north-east. His topsails were still in sight to 
the north-east when the French appeared coming from the north- 
west. They sighted the coast on the 29th to the west of Alex- 
andria, and on the 1st of July they occupied the anchorage and 
town. While Nelson was ranging along the coast pi Asia Miner, 
seeking for news of them and finding none, on his way back to 
Sicily, the French were landing their army. The British squadron 
reached Syracuse on the 19th of July. Here Nelson was able to 
obtain water and stores and clear indications that the French 
had gone to Egypt. On the 24th he sailed, and on the 1st of 
August was again off Alexandria. The battle of the Pyramids 
had been fought on the 21st, and Napoleon was master of Egypt. 
The fear of the British admiral was that the French fleet had left 
the coast in the interval of his absence. Brueys, the French 
admiral, had had a choice of three courses open to him — to enter 
the old harbour of Alexandria, to sail for Corfu then occupied 
by the French or to take a strong anchorage on the coast and 
prepare to repel attack. To enter the harbour was difficult for 
large ships, and to leave it by its one narrow entrance in the 
presence of even an inferior force would have been impossible. 
Brueys therefore decided against that course. He did not sail 
for Corfu, partly because some of the army stores were still 
in his ships and partly because his squadron, ill fitted from 
the first, was short of provisions, and no more could as yet be 
obtained from the shore. He therefore stationed himself with 
thirteen of his ships of the line in the roadstead of Aboukir, 
some 15 m. north-east of Alexandria, between the island of 
Aboukir and the Rosetta mouth of the Nile. Here he was found 
on the evening of the 1st of August when the British fleet came 
in sight. The French line of thirteen ships was anchored to the 
east of Aboukir, now called Nelson's Island, in a curve stretching 
to the south-east. It consisted of the " Guerrier " (74), the 
" Conquerant " (74), the " Spartiate " (74), the "Aquilon "(74), 
" Souverain Peuple " (74), " Franklin " (80), " Orient " (120), 
Admiral Bruey's flagship " Tonnant " (80), " Heureux " (74), 
" Timoleon » (74), " Guillaume Tell " (80), " Mercure " (74) and 
" Genereux " (74), counting from the west end. The French 
ships had begun the voyage short-handed and many men were 
absent on shore filling the water-casks. They fought with a 
half to two-thirds of their complements, which suffered from the 
bad training and inexperience of the French republican navy. 
A council of flag officers and captains was being held in the 
" when the British squadron appeared. 

	1 Orient ; 

When the enemy was sighted Nelson at once gave the order 
to attack. All the possibilities of battle had been fully discussed 
between him and his captains. Much controversy of a rather idle 
character has taken place as to assigning the credit for the actual 
course adopted; it was almost dictated to men so experienced 
and capable as the British captains and their admiral by the 
position of the enemy. If the French had been anchored so near 
the shore that it was not possible to pass between them and it, 
the British ships, coming from the west with a westerly wind, 
would have passed outside of them, endeavouring to anchor 
one on the bow and the next on the quarter of each French ship 
in succession. Those in the van might have been crushed before 
the ships in the rear and to leeward could come to their assistance. 
As it was, the French were so placed that there was room for the 
British ships to pass between them and the land. Therefore it 
was possible for the first comers of the British squadron to pass 
inside the French ships, to anchor there, and to allow the next 
comers to anchor outside so as to put the enemy's van between 
two fires. This disposition was not without its drawbacks, for it 
entailed the risk that the British ships might fire into one 
another while directing their guns on an object between them. 
The risk was the greater because the battle began at sundown 
and was continued in the dark. Yet it had the advantage that it 
produced an intense concentration of fire. In the circumstances 
it had the peculiar advantage, of which, however, the British 
captains may not have been aware, that as the French were very 
short-handed they were unable to work both broadsides to the 
full. It is to this fact that we must attribute the comparatively 
small loss suffered by the British ships in an attack which, if 
made against a well-appointed enemy, must have been extremely 
costly. Whether by previous arrangement with Nelson, or 
because he acted on the facts before him, the first British captain 
to come into action, Captain Foley of the " Goliath " (74), 
passed inside the French, and anchored abreast of the second 
of them, the " Conquerant." The "Zealous" (74), under 
Captain Hood, anchored on the bow of the first Frenchman, 
the " Guerrier." The " Audacious " (74), under Captain Davidge 
Gould, anchored between the " Zealous " and " Goliath." 
The " Theseus " (74), under Captain Miller, anchored inside of 
the third French ship, the " Spartiate." The " Orion " (74), 
under Captain Saumarez, anchored abreast of the fifth French 
vessel, the " Souverain Peuple." Then Nelson, in his flagship 
the " Vanguard " (74), the sixth British ship to come into 
action, anchored on the outside of the French line abreast of the 
" Spartiate " already engaged with the " Theseus." The 
" Minotaur " (74), under Captain Thomas Louis, and the 
"Defence" (74), under Captain Peyton, anchored next to 
the " Vanguard " and opposite the fourth French ship, the 
" Aquilon," and the " Souverain Peuple," already engaged 
with the " Orion." Thus eight British 74's which had only to 
fight one broadside at a time were thrown on five undermanned 
French 74^, which had to fight both and were speedily crushed. 
One British vessel, the " CuLloden " (74), under Captain Trou- 
bridge, grounded on the shoal at Aboukir, and could not get 
into action. She served as a beacon to the vessels coming behind 
her. As the French van was silenced, and the fresh vessels came 
up from the British rear, the attack was carried down the French 
line. About 9.30 p.m. the " Orient " was seen to be in flames, and 
at 10 p.m. she blew up. The explosion imposed a brief suspension 
of battle, but the fire was soon renewed. By midnight the battle 
was over. In the course of the next day the " Guillaume Tell," 
the " Genereux " and two frigates succeeded in escaping, but they 
were the only survivors of the fleet attacked in the roadstead 
of Aboukir. 

The destruction of the French fleet, which isolated Napoleon in. 
Egypt, had profound political influence in Europe. The total 
loss of .the British squadron was 218 killed and 678 wounded. 
The loss of the French was never exactly ascertained, but it 
was certainly very much greater. Admiral Brueys was killed 
on the quarter-deck of his flagship, and Nelson received a wound 
in the head from a langridge shot which disabled him. 

See Captain Mahan's Life of Nelson (2nd. ed., 1899). (D. H.) 


NILES, a city of Trumbull county, Ohio, U.S.A., on the 
Mahoning river, at the mouth of the Meander and Mosquito 
creeks, about 55 m. E.S.E. of Cleveland. Pop. (1890) 4289; 
(1900) 7468 (2104 foreign-born); (1910) 8361. It is served by the 
Baltimore & Ohio,, the Erie and the Pennsylvania railways, 
and by an interurban electric system. Coal and iron-ore are 
abundant in the vicinity, and the city's principal manufactures 
are sheet steel, sheet iron, tin, metal lath, boilers and railway cars. 
The municipality owns and operates its waterworks and electric- 
lighting plant. Niles was settled in 1832, laid out in 1834, 
incorporated as a village in 1865 and chartered as a city in 1895. 
It was named (1834) in honour of Hezekiah Niles (1777-1839), 
the founder and editor of the weekly Niles 9 s Register (1811-1849). 


NILGAI, or Nylghau ("blue bull"), the largest antelope 
{Boselaphus tragocamelus) found in India, where it represents 
the kudu and eland group of Agrica. Only the bulls have 
horns, and these are short and insignificant. The general 
colour of the old bulls is bluish grey, but younger bulls and 
cows are browner. The nilgai is about the size of a mule (see 
Antelope). 


NILGIRIS, THE, or Neelgherries (Blue Mountains), a 
range of hills in southern India, which gives its name to a district 
of the Madras Presidency. The Nilgiris are really a plateau 
rather than a range, rising abruptly from the plains on most 
sides, with a general elevation of about 6500 ft. above the 
sea. 

The District of the Nilgiris is the smallest administrative 
district in Madras. It formerly consisted exclusively of a moun- 
tain plateau lying at an average elevation of 6500 ft., with an area 
of about 725 sq. m. In 1873 this was increased by the addition 
of the Ochterlony valley in the south-east Wynaad, and again, in 
1877, by other portions of the Wynaad, makinga total area of 958 
sq. m. The administrative headquarters is at Ootacamund, 
which is also the summer capital of the government of Madras. 
The summit of the Nilgiri hills is an undulating plateau, fre- 
quently breaking into lofty ridges and steep rocky eminences. 
The descent to the plains is sudden and abrupt, the average fall 
from the crest to the general level below being about 6000 ft., 
save on the north, where the base of the mountains rests upon 
the elevated land of Wynaad and Mysore, standing between 2000 
and 3000 ft. above sea-level. The Ochterlony valley and Wynaad 
country consist of a series of broken valleys, once forest-clad 
throughout, but now studded with tea and coffee-gardens. 
The highest mountain peaks are — Dodabctta, 8760 ft.; Kudia- 
kad, 8502; Bevoibetta, 8488; Makurti, 8402; Davarsolabetta, 
8380; Kunda, 8353; Kundamoge, 7816; Ootacamund, 7361; 
Tambrabetta, 7292; Hokabetta, 7267. There are six well- 
known passes or ghats by which the district communicates 
with the neighbouring plains, three of which are practicable to 
wheeled traffic. The chief rivers are the Moyar, Paikara and 
Calicut, none of which are navigable. The forests consist of fine 
timber trees, such as sdl (Shorea robiista), kino {Pterocarpus 
Marsupium), jack (Artocarpusintegrifolia), blackwood (Dalbergia 
latifolia) and teak. Eucalyptus and Australian wattle have been 
extensively planted in the higher grounds of the Wynaad. The 
hills were first explored by British officers in 1814, and in 1821 
the first English house was built on the plateau. The hill tribes 
include the Todas, the Badagas, the Kotas, the Kurumbas 
and the Irulas (£.t>.). The total population of the district in 
1901 was 111,437, showing an increase of 11-7% in the decade. 
The commercially important products are coffee, tea and 
cinchona. Coffee cultivation was introduced about 1844. One 
of its chief seats is the Ochterlony valley. The Madras govern- 
ment commenced the experimental cultivation of cinchona 
on the Nilgiris in i860, and several private cinchona gardens were 
laid out, owing to the success of the government experiment. 
The climate of the Nilgiri hills is almost unrivalled for equability 
of temperature. The average is 58 F. The approach from the 
plains is by the branch of the Madras railway from Podanur to 
Mettapolliem, whence a metre-gauge line on the rack principle has 
been constructed to Coonoor, with an extension to Ootacamund. 
The chief educational institution is the Lawrence Asylum at 
Ootacamund maintained by government. The military quarters 
are at Wellington. 

See Nilgiris District Gazetteer (Madras, 1908). 


NILSSON, CHRISTINE (1843- ), Swedish singer, was bora 
at WederslSff, near Wexio, Sweden, on the 20th of August 1843. 
Her father was a poor working man, and she used as a girl to 
sing and perform on the violin at popular gatherings. In 1857 
a wealthy man, M. ToroSrhjelm, perceiving the unusual beauty 
of her voice while she was performing at a fair in Ljungby, 
provided the means for giving her- a proper musical education, 
and in i860 she was heard in the concert halls in Stockholm and 
Upsala, and then went to Paiis, where, after four years' study, 
she made her d6but in the r61e of Violetta at the Theatre Lyrique 
on the 27th of October 1864. Between that date and 1872, when 
she married M. Auguste Rouzaud, she was the leading prima 
donna. Her first appearance in London was in 1867, A year 
later, on the 9th of March, she made her first appearance in the 
Paris Opera House as OphSlie in Hamlet; and she visited the 
United States in 1870. She sang in St Petersburg in 1872; 
in America in 1873-1874 and in 1882; in Germany and 
Austria between 1876 and 1877; and in the next few years in 
Spain and Scandinavia; but after her marriage her appearances 
in public were rare. M. Rouzaud died in 1882, and five years 
afterwards Madame Nilsson married Count A. de Casa Miranda, 
and finally retired from the stage. 


NIMAR, a district of British India, in the Nerbudda division 
of the Central Provinces. The administrative headquarters are 
at Khandwa; but the capital in Mahommedan times was 
Burhanpur. Area, 4273 sq. m. Pop. (1901) 329,615, showing 
an increase of 14*2 % in the decade. The district consists of two 
portions of the Nerbudda and Tapti valleys, separated by a 
section of the Satpura range, about 15 m. in breadth. On the 
highest peak, about 850 ft. above the plain and 1800 above 
sea-level, stands the fortress of Asirgarh, commanding a pass 
which has for centuries been the chief highway between Upper 
India and the Deccan. The district contains extensive forests, 
but the only tract reserved by government is the Punasa forest, 
which extends for about 120 m. along the south bank of the 
Nerbudda, and contains young teak, besides sdj {Tertninalia 
tomentosa) and anjan (Hardwickia binala). The staple crops are 
y cotton and millet; ganja or Indian hemp is also allowed to be 
grown under government supervision. The Great Indian Penin- 
sula railway runs through the district, and a branch of the 
Rajputana line from Indore joins it at Khandwa. There are 
factories for ginning and pressing cotton at Khandwa, and 
manufacture of gold-embroidered cloth at Burhanpur. 

The name Nimar, derived from that of the ancient province, is 
also applied to a district in the state of Indore, lying W. of the 
British district on both banks of the Nerbudda. Area, 3871 
sq. m.; pop. (1901) 257,110. From 1823 onwards this tract, 
then belonging to Sindhia, was under British management; in 
1861 it was ceded in full sovereignty to the British, but in 1867 
it passed to Holkar as the result of an exchange of territory. 

See Nimar District Gazetteer (Allahabad, 1908). 


NIMES, a city of southern France, capital of the department 
of Gard, 174 m. S. by W. of Lyons on the Paris-Lyon railway, 
between Avignon and Montpellier. Pop. (1906) 70,708. Nimes, 
important alike for its industries and for its archaeological 
treasures, lies at the foot of the Garrigues, a range of stony and 
barren hills which limit it on the north and west. The most 
prominent of these is the Mont Cavalier, the summit of which is 
crowned by the Tour Magne, a ruined Roman tower commanding 
a fine view of the town and its surroundings. To the south and 
east the town overlooks the monotonous plain traversed by the 
Vistre, and for the most part given over to the cultivation of the 
vine. Nimes covers a large area, owing to the fact that its 
population is housed in low buildings, not in the lofty tenements 
which are found in most of the industrial towns of France. The 
central and oldest part is encircled by shady boulevards, which 
occupy the site of the old fortifications. Here are to be found the 
majority of the Roman remains for which Nimes is remarkable. 
The most celebrated is the amphitheatre, the best preserved 
though not the largest in France. It dates from the ist or 2nd 
century a.d., and was used as a fortress for some time during 
succeeding centuries. Occupied during the middle ages hy a 
special quarter, with even a church of its own, it was cleared 
in 1809, and since then has been well kept in repair. It is built of 
large stones fitted together without mortar. In form it is ellip- 
tical, measuring approximately 440 by 336 ft. externally; the 
arena is 227 hy 1265 ft. The elevation (70 ft. in all) consists of 
a ground story of 60 arches, an upper story of 60 arches and an 
attic with consoles pierced with holes for supporting the velarium 
or awning. The huilding, which was capable of holding nearly 
24,000 persons, has 4 main gates, one at each of the cardinal 
points; and 124 doorways gave exit from the 35 tiers of the 
amphitheatre to the inner galleries. Originally designed for 
gladiatorial shows, naval spectacles, chariot races, wolf or boar 
hunts, the arena has in recent times been used for bull-fights. 
The celehrated Maison Carree, a temple in the style of the 
Parthenon, but on a smaller scale, 82 ft. long by 40 wide, is one 
of the finest monuments of the Roman period, and according 
to an inscription is dedicated to Gaius and Lucius Caesar, 
adopted sons of Augustus, and dates from the beginning of the 
Christian era. It contains a collection of antique sculptures 
and coins. The so-called temple of Diana, which adjoins the 
Fountain Gardens, was prohably a building connected with the 
neighbouring baths of which remains are visible. Two Roman 
gates, the Porte d'Auguste, consisting of two large archways 
flanked by two smaller ones and dating from a.d. 16, and the 
Porte de France are still preserved. The Tour Magne (Turris 
Magna) is still 92 ft. in height, and was formerly a third higher. 
Admittedly the oldest monument of Nimes, it has been variously 
regarded as an old signal tower, a treasure house or a mausoleum. 
Attached to the ramparts erected by Augustus, and turned into 
a fortress in the middle ages by the counts of Toulouse, the Tour 
Magne was restored about 1840. Near the Tour Magne has been 
discovered the reservoir from which the water conveyed by the 
Pont du Gard (see Aqueduct) was distributed throughout the 
city. 

When it still possessed its capitol, the temple of Augustus, 
the basilica of Plotina erected under Hadrian, the temple of 
Apollo, the haths, the theatre, the circus, constructed in the 
reign of Nero, the Campus Martius and the fortifications built* 
by Augustus, Nimes must have been one of the richest of the 
Roman cities of Gaul. The cathedral (St Castor), occupying, it 
is believed, the site of the temple of Augustus, is partly Roman- 
esque and partly Gothic in style. The church of St Paul, a 
modern Romanesque building, is adorned with frescoes by 
Hippolyte and Paul Flandrin; St Baudile (modern Gothic) is 
of note for the two stone spires which adorn its facade; and the 
court-house has a fine Corinthian colonnade and a pediment. 
Other buildings of note are the old citadel (dating from 1687, 
and now used as a central prison), and the former lycee, which 
contains the public library and the museums of epigraphy, of 
archaeological models of the Roman and Romanesque periods, 
and of natural history. The town also has a collection of paint- 
ings. The esplanade in front of the court-house has in the 
centre a handsome fountain with five marhle statues by James 
Pradier. The Fountain Gardens, in the north-west of the town, 
owe their peculiar character as well as their name to a spring of 
water which after heavy rains is copious enough not only to fill 
the ornamental hasins (constructed in the 18th century with 
balustrades and statues on ancient foundations) but also to form 
a considerable stream. Neither the spring, however, nor the 
Vistre into which it discharges, is sufficient for the wants of the 
city, and water has consequently been hrought from the Rhone, 
a distance of 17 m. A heautiful avenue, the Boulevard de la 
Republique, runs south for nearly 1 m. from the middle walk 
of the garden. Nimes has erected monuments to the " Children 
of Gard" (by A. Mercia), to Alphonse Daudet and to the 
Provencal poet Jean Rcboul, natives of the town. 

The city is the seat of a bishop, a prefect, a court of appeal and 
a court of assizes, and has tribunals of first instance and of 
commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, an exchange, a chamber 
of commerce and a branch of the Bank of France. Its edu- 
cational establishments include lycees and training colleges for 
both sexes, and schools of music and art. 

At the close of the middle ages the industries of Nimes were 
raised to a state of great prosperity by a colony from Lomhardy 
and Tuscany; and, though the plague, the Wars of Religion 
and the revocation of the edict of Nantes were all sufficiently 
disastrous in their effects, before the Revolution about half of the 
whole community, or from 10,000 to 12,000 persons, had come 
to be engaged in manufactures, chiefly that of silk. Upholstery 
materials, shawls, carpets, handkerchiefs, tapes and braidings, 
hrandy, hosiery, leather, clothes, candles, machinery and boots 
and shoes are now manufactured, and there are a number of 
foundries. Nimes is, besides, one of the great southern markets 
for wine and brandy, and there is a good trade in grain, groceries 
and colonial wares. Quarries of hard limestone, used as the 
material for the amphitheatre and other buildings by the Romans, 
are still worked in the vicinity. 

Nimes, the ancient Nemausus, derived its name from the 
sacred wood in which the Volcae Arecomici (who of their own 
accord surrendered to the Romans in 121 B.C.) were wont to 
hold their assemblies. Strabo states that it was the metropolis 
of a district containing twenty-four dependent towns, and that 
it was independent of the proconsuls of Gallia Narbonensis. 
Constituted a colony of veterans by Augustus, and endowed 
with numerous privileges, it built a temple and struck a medal in 
honour of its founder. The medal, which afterwards furnished 
the type for the coat of arms granted to the town by Francis I., 
bears on one side the heads of Caesar Augustus and Vipsanius 
Agrippa (the former crowned with laurel), while on the other 
there is a crocodile chained to a palm-tree, with the legend Col. 
Nem. It was Agrippa who built the public baths at Nimes, the 
temple pf Diana and the aqueduct of the Pont du Gard. The 
city-walls, erected by Augustus, were nearly 4 m. in circuit, 
30 ft. high and 10 ft. broad, flanked by ninety towers and pierced 
hy ten gates. Hadrian on his way back from Britain erected at 
Nimes two memorials of his benefactress Plotina. In the very 
height of its prosperity the city was ravaged hy the Vandals; 
the Visigoths followed, and turned the amphitheatre into a 
stronghold, which at a later date was set on fire along with the 
gates of the city when Charles Martel drove out the Saracens. 
Nimes became a republic under the protection of Pippin the 
Short; and in 1185 it passed to the counts of Toulouse, who 
restored its prosperity and enclosed it with ramparts whose 
enceinte, less extensive than that of Augustus, may still be traced 
in the boulevards of the present day. The city took part in the 
crusade against the Albigenses in 1207. Under Louis VIII. it 
received a royal garrison into its amphitheatre; under Louis XI. 
it was captured by the duke of Burgundy, and in 1420 was 
recovered hy the dauphin (Charles VII.). On a visit to Nimes 
Francis I. enriched it with a university and a school of arts. 
By 1558 ahout three-fourths of the inhabitants had become 
Protestants, and in 1567 a massacre of Catholics took place on 
St Michael's day. From the accession of Henry IV. till the revo- 
cation of the edict of Nantes (1685) the Protestant community 
devoted itself to active industry; but after that disastrous event 
great numbers went into exile or joined the Camisards. Louis 
XIV. built a fortress (1687) to keep in check the disturbances 
caused by the rival religious parties. Nimes passed unhurt 
through the storms of the Revolution; but in 18 15 Trestaillon 
and his handit followers pillaged and burned and plundered and 
massacred the Bonapartists and Protestants. Since then the 
city has remained divided into two strongly marked factions — 
Catholics and Protestants — though with no repetition of such 
scenes. 

See H. Bazin, Nimes Gallo-Romain (Nimes, 1891); L. Menard, 
Histoire civile, eccUsiastique et litteraire de la ville de Nismes; R. Peyre, 
Nimes t Aries et Orange (Nimes, 1903). 


NIMES, COUNCILS OF (Concilia Ncmausensia). Of the four 
councils held at Nimes those of 886 and 1284 are relatively 
unimportant. The synod of 394 adopted seven canons on 
discipline, which were first printed in 1743 and have not as yet 

made their way into the great collections. At the council of 
July 1096 Pope Urban II. presided, and sixteen disciplinary 
canons were adopted, which have many points of contact with 
the canons of the council of Clermont. 

See, for the first council of Nimes, Lauchert, pp. 183-185; for the 
others, Hardouin vi. 1. 397, vi. 2. 1747 ff., vii. 903 ff.; full titles 
under Council. (W. VV. R.*) 


NIMROD (iVv?} f yidj; Septuagint, NejSpcoS: various reading 
in Gen. x. 8, Nej3pdbj>: Vulg. Nemrod). Nimrod is only mentioned 
in three passages in the Bible; in Micah v. 6 Assyria is called 
" the land of Nimrod," and 1 Chron. i. 10 quotes a portion of the 
third, the most important reference, Gen. x. 8-12. The last- 
named is ascribed to one of the oldest writers of the Pentateuch, 
the Yahwist; but not perhaps to the oldest stratum of his work 
(Ball, Sacred Books of the Old Testament). In Gen. x. 8, as Jabal 
was the inventor of music, so Nimrod was the first warrior, 
gibbdr, the first hunter, " he became a mighty hunter, gibbdr 
cayidh, before Yahweh, so that it is said, A mighty hunter before 
Yahweh like Nimrod "; the first builder of cities and ruler of a 
widespread dominion, " the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, 
Erech, Accad and Calneh in the land of Shinar. Out of that 
land he went forth into Assyria, 1 and built Nineveh, Rehobot fa- 
ir, Calah and Resen between Nineveh and Calah (the same is 
the great city)." The general statement that Assyria was 
originally an offshoot and dependence of Babylon is substantially 
in accordance with Assyrian and Babylonian authorities. As 
the chapter stands, Nimrod is a descendant of Ham, cf. verses 
6 and 8; but as Babylon and Assyria were Semitic, cf. 
verses 21, 22, and as verses 6, 7, on the one hand, and verses 
8-12, on the other, come from different documents, we must 
dissociate the two consecutive paragraphs, and regard the 
" Cush " of verse 8 as the Babylonian Cash or Cassites, a people 
quite distinct from the Cush of verse 6, which is Ethiopia; the 
text and interpretation of portions of Gen x. 8-12 are doubtful. 2 
The " mighty hunter before Yahweh " has been variously 
explained as "a divinely great hunter" (Spurrell); "a hunter 
*u defiance of Yahweh " (Holzinger); " a hunter with the help 
of Yahweh " or " of some deity whose name has been replaced by 
Yahweh " (Gunkel, Genesis, p. 82). 

The name Nimrod has not been found in any ancient (say 
older than 500 B.C.) non-Israelite document or inscription; and 
there is no conclusive evidence for identifying Nimrod with any 
of the names found in such documents. In the absence of 
evidence, the theories are naturally endless, especially as both 
the legendary and the historical heroes of the ancient East 
were often " mighty hunters." Nimrod would suggest to a Jew 
or Syrian the idea of "rebel," *wi= rebel; but this is not 
likely to be the etymology. By regarding the " N " as per- 
formative, NimrcwHias been identified with Merodach, the god 
of Babylon (Pinches, Hastings's Bible Diet). He has also been 
identified with Gilgamesh, the hero of the epic which contains the 
Babylonian Deluge story (Jeremias, Das A.T. im Lichte des alien 
Orients), with various historical kings of Babylonia, with Orion, 
&c, &c. As the name Nmrt (Pctrie, Nemart) frequently occurs 
in Egyptian documents of the XXIInd Dynasty, c. 972-749 
(Petrie,H«/. of Egypt, iii. 242, &c), the story of Nimrod is some- 
times (E. Meyer ap. Holzinger, Genesis) conjectured to be of 
Egyptian origin. Some support might be obtained for this 
view by supposing Cush in verse 8 to be Ethiopia as in verse 6; 
but it seems impossible to reconcile it with the statements in 
Genesis and Micah which connect Nimrod with Babylon and 
Assyria. It is possible that the Nebrod of the Septuagint 
(similarly Philo and Josephus) is the more ancient form of the 
name (Cheyne, Ency. Bibl.). 

	1 So Revised Version text with Kautzsch, Dillmann, Gunkel, 
	Holzinger, &c.; Revised Version marg., "Out of that land went 
	forth Asshur V' less probably following Septuagint, Vulgate, 
	Authorized Version, &c. 

	1 Dr Cheyne's reconstructions in Ency. Bibt., article " Nimrod,'* 
	are generally regarded as far too sweeping. Ball, Sacred Books of 
	the Old Testament, marks verse 9, which describes Nimrod as " a 
	mighty hunter," as a later addition, giving a mistaken explanation 
	of the gibbdr of verse 8. 

Many later legends gathered round Nimrod ; Philo, De gigantibus, 
§ 15, allegorises more suo. Nimrod stands for treachery or desertion, 
according to the derivation from mrd mentioned above. According 
to Josephus, Ant, I. iv. 2, vi. 2, Nimrod built the Tower of Babel. 
According to the Rabbis (Tzeenah u Reenah, Hershon's tr., p. 59), 
Nimrod cast Abraham into the fire because he refused to worship 
idols. God, however, delivered him. 

Nimrod, in the form Nimrud or Nimroud, is an element in many 
modern place-names in western Asia. (VV. H. Be.) 


NINE MEN'S MORRIS, known also as Morelles and Merelles, 
an ancient English game played with 9 counters a side on a board 
marked with four squares, one within the other. The middle 
points of the three inside squares are connected by straight lines, 
and, in a variation of the game, the corners also. The players, 
whose counters are of different colours, place these alternately 
one by one upon the intersections of the lines, the object of each 
being to get three of his own men in line, in which case he has 
the privilege of pounding, i.e. removing from the board, any one 
of his opponent's men; although he may not take one of a row 
of three, unless there are no others. When all 18 counters have 
been placed on the board they are moved to adjacent unoccupied 
intersections. When all but three of a player's men have been 
captured he is allowed to jump or hop to any vacant point he 
chooses. As soon as a player is reduced to two men he loses. 
In the time of Shakespeare (Midsummer Night's Dream, Act ir. 
Scene 1 ) the game was commonly played out of doors. 


NINEVEH (Heb. mp; in classical authors Niws, Ninus; 
LXX. Ntmrq, Nrjvevrj: Assyrian Nina or Ninua), the best known 
and highly renowned capital of the Assyrian empire. There was 
a quarter or suburb of the old Babylonian city of Lagash whose 
name was written in the same way; this may possibly have been 
the home of those settlers from Babylonia who gave its name to 
the Assyrian city. The name was carried elsewhere, probably by 
Assyrian settlers, and we meet with Ninoe in Asia Minor (Th. 
Noldeke, Hermes, v. 464, n. 2). Philostratus calls a Hicrapolis, 
7) ctpxcua Ntws but it must not be confounded with the Egyptian 
Ni-y, Assur-bani-pal NT, the frontier city to the east of Egypt's 
greatest extension, where Tethmosis (Thothmes) III. hunted ■ 
elephants, probably situated on the Euphrates. This, however, 
may be the origin of Ctesias's statement (ap. Diod. ii. 3) that 
Nineveh stood on the Euphrates; the Arabic geographer Yaqut 
places a Nineveh on the lower Euphrates near Babylon, and this 
may be a colony from the great Nineveh, or possibly the Nina 
of Lagash. 

The derivation of the name is uncertain. The name Nina was 
borne also by the goddess Ishtar, whose worship was the special 
cult of Nineveh, and Ninua may well be a hypocoristicon of 
N ina. T he ideogram for Nineveh, as also for the Lagash city, 
t ^JT <J , is a fish enclosed in the sign for house, possibly indi- 
cating a fish-pond, sacred to Ishtar. As the Semitic nunu means 
a fish, a play upon nunu and Nina is suggested, but the name 
may be pre-Semitic. A derivation from the root *u with a mean- 
ing like " lowland " is doubtful, unless we are sure that the name 
is Semitic, and that the Lagash city also lay low. 

Nineveh was situated at the N.W. angle of an irregular 
trapezium of land which lay between the rivers Husur (Khausar, 
Choser) on the N.W., Gomal on the N.E. and E., Upper Zab on 
the S.E. and S. and Tigris on the S. and W. In extent this plain 
is 25 m. by 15 m., and contains the ruins of Nineveh at Kuyunjik 
and Nebi Yunus, of Dur Sargon at Khorsabad to the N.E. of 
Calah at Nimrud to the S. as well as of other towns not yet 
identified. The whole plain has a gradual slope from the low 
range of Jebel Maqtub and the hill of Ain-es-safra on the N.E. 
to the Tigris on the S.W. This plain was, for those days, amply 
protected on three sides by the two rapid broad streams of the 
Tigris and its tributary Zab, by the hills on the N.E. and the 
river Gomal at their base. The weak N.W. side was partly 
covered by the Husur, an impassable flood in winter but easily 
fordable in summer. The floods caused by the Husur were 
frequent and destructive, on one occasion sweeping away the 
palace terrace at Nineveh and exposing the tombs of the kings, 
on another isolating Khorsabad. A great series of dams was 
therefore constructed (mapped and described in " Topography 
of Nineveh," J.R.A.S. xiv. 318 ff.) which controlled the floods 
and filled the ditches and moats of Nineveh. One of these 
ditches can be traced over 2 m. with a breadth of 200 ft., and was 
lined with a rampart on the city side. 

The city on the river side of the Tigris extended about 2\ m., 
its north wall measured 7000 ft., the eastern wall was nearly 
3 m. long and the southern about 1000 ft. The city thus formed 
a long narrow strip along the Tigris, pierced at right angles by the 
Husur, the waters of which, by closing the great dam in the 
eastern wall, could be sent round the moats to the N. and S. 
The Tigris may have swept the western wall, though now a wide 
belt of sand has accumulated between the ruins and its present 
channel which is perpetually shifting. The actual extent of the 
city may be reckoned at about 1S00 acres, or about two-thirds 
the size of Rome within Aurelian's Wall. At the rate of 50 sq. 
yds. to a person, it would have held a population of 175,000; 
but the extent of the palaces, gardens, &c.,* forbid us to imagine 
any such multitude except as refugees during a siege. Outside 
this city proper lay wide outskirts (kablu) which were divided into 
quarters each with a separate governor (Saknu) . Further afield 
lay the Rebit-Ninua, in which some have recognized the Reho- 
both-Ir of Gen. x. 11 (Ninua is often replaced by it or alu in the 
inscriptions), a less closely populated area which extended to 
and included the site of Khorsabad, before Sargon II. built his 
city of Dur-Sargon there. Across the Tigris, connected by a 
bridge, lay an extensive district, probably now replaced by 
Mosul. As Esarhaddon entered Nineveh, on his triumphal 
return from Sidon, through Rebit-Ninua, it is probable that this 
name covered the western suburbs. The walled city formed 
a sort of Acropolis, and it is difficult to say exactly how far the 
name of Nineveh should be extended. Few traces of private 
houses have been found within the walls, but as deeds of sale speak 
of houses in Nineveh, which were bounded on three sides by other 
houses, there must have been continuous streets within the area 
denoted by that name. Great emphasis has been laid on the 
agreement of a tetrapolis, formed by Nineveh, Khorsabad, Calah 
and Keramlis, with the dimensions given by Diodorus and with 
the phrase " an exceeding great city of three days' journey " 
(Jonah iii. 3). Admitting that this whole area was thickly 
inhabited and might be regarded by those at a distance as one 
city, and that the district may well have had a common name, 
which could hardly be Assur, there is yet no native evidence that 
Nineveh extended so far. There is no trace of a common wall, 
each city was as strongly fortified towards the interior as on the 
outside. Each had its own faknu, and the governor of Nineveh 
stands below the governors of Assur and Calah in official lists. 
In deeds of sale " the road to Calah " is as often named as the 
" king's highway " to Arbela or Assur. 

The history of Nineveh is, of course, bound up with that of 
Assyria in general. Later Assyrian writers professed to carry 
back its foundation to the creation of the world, but we lack 
any historical evidence of its age or early history. We may 
conjecture that it was founded by settlers from Babylonia Nina, 
and the statement that Nimrod founded it from Babylonia, along 
with Calah, Rehoboth-Ir and Resen, shows that this opinion 
was early held. We are, however, still without evidence that 
this was its first occupation. The mention of Gudea's building 
a temple for Ishtar in Nina (2800 B.C.) may refer to the Lagash 
city and an inscription of Dungi, king of Ur (2700 B.C.), said to 
have been found at Nineveh, might have been carried there by 
some antiquary king. We reach firm ground with the statement 
ofKhammurabi(2285B.c.)that he" made the waters of Ishtar to 
be glorious in Nineveh in £-mes-mes," the temple of Ishtar there 
(Code IV. 60-62). As he had just spoken of "returning the 
gracious protecting god to Assur," and spells the name Ni-nu-a, 
there can be no doubt that Nineveh is meant. Shalmaneser I., 
in his zikati inscriptions (L. W. King, Records oj the Reign of 
TukuIH-Ninib /.p. 131), c. 1300 B.C., records his restoration of 
the temple of Ishtar of Nineveh, which had been built hy Samsi- 
Hadad (Shamshi-Adad) and restored once before by Assur- 
uballit. Which Samsi-Hadad (out of six at least) this was, 
and which Assur-uballit we are not told; the first of the former 
name known to us was a contemporary of Khammurabi and, 
if he built the temple first, Khammurabi may have, plundered 
it and then restored it again; but an even earlier Samsi-Hadad 
may be meant. Dushratta, king of Mitanni, about 1400 B.C., in 
the Tell el-Amarna letters offers to send to the king of Egypt 
an image of Ishtar of Nineveh; from which it has been inferred 
that Nineveh was then under foreign rule. The same letters 
mention Shaushbi as goddess of Nineveh. A statue of a female 
nude figure found at Nineveh bears an inscription showing it 
to have been in the palace of Assur-bel-kala (1080 B.C.), who is 
therefore supposed to have resided in Nineveh. Assur-resh-ishi, 
Mutakkil Nusku and Tiglath-pileser I. restored a temple of Ishtar, 
probably in Nineveh. Assur-narsin-apli (885 B.C.) restored the 
temple £-mas-mas of Ishtar at Nineveh, but removed his resi- 
dence to Calah. Shalmaneser II. set out on several of his expe- 
ditions from Nineveh, but in the latter part of his reign resided at 
Calah, and when rebellion broke out under his son Assur-danin- 
apli Nineveh sided with the rebel prince. Sennacherib records 
that several of his royal ancestors had been buried in Nineveh 
and they presumably had resided there. At the commencement 
of his reign Sennacherib found Nineveh a poor place. A store- 
house, the ancient and renowned temple, an armoury or storehouse, 
were the chief buildings. Two lofty platforms along the Tigris 
front had served as foundations of the palaces hitherto built, but 
the platforms had been wrecked and the palaces were in decay. 
Sennacherib restored and enlarged the northern platform now 
covered by the Kuyunjik mound and built his palace on the 
south-western portion of it. It has been only partially excavated, 
though seventy-one rooms were opened, and it is the grandest 
architectural effort of Assyria. The bas-reliefs with which the 
walls are adorned are .unrivalled in antiquity, for variety of 
subject, breadth of composition, truth of presentation and 
artistic treatment. The accuracy with which building operations 
are portrayed, and a sense of landscape, are great advances even 
on the superb work of Sargon's palace at Khorsabad. On the 
adjoining platform to the south, now Nebi-Yunus, Sennacherib 
erected an arsenal for military supplies. Nineveh was badly 
supplied with water for drinking; the inhabitants had to " turn 
their eyes to heaven for the rain," but Sennacherib conducted 
water by eighteen canals from the hills into the Husur and 
distributed its waters round the moats and into store tanks, or 
ponds, within the city. He laid out a fine park or Paradise, for 
pleasure and the chase, to the east of his palaces, and built up a 
magnificent "triumphal way" sixty-two cubits broad and forbade 
any householder to encroach upon the street. Sennacherib made 
Nineveh his court residence and, after his destruction of Babylon 
and the influx of the enormous booty brought back from his con- 
quests, it must have been the most magnificent and wealthiest 
city of the East. 

Esarhaddon began to rebuild Babylon and so departed from 
his father's purpose to make Nineveh the metropolis of the 
empire, but he did not altogether neglect the city. He rebuilt 
the temple of Assur at Nineveh, and a palace for himself now 
covered by the Nebi-Yunus mound and so inefficiently explored. 
Thither Assur-bani-pal brought the rebel Egyptian vassals 
Necho and Sharru-ludari, the Elamite kings, the booty and 
captives of his continual conquests. He rebuilt the temples 
and a palace for himself north of Sennacherib's on the site of 
the latter 's harem; which was adorned with extraordinary 
variety and richness. His sculptures are at the highest range 
of original and effective delineation in antiquity. Especially 
is his palace famous for the celebrated library, of which Senna- 
cherib had made a commencement. Tens of thousands of clay 
tablets, systematically arranged on shelves, contained the 
classics of the Babylonian literature for which his scribes ran- 
sacked and copied the treasures of all then known centres of 
literary life. 

Very little trace is left of the fortunes of Nineveh during the 
reigns of the sons of Assur-bani-pal. Nineveh, according to 
Herodotus, was besieged by Cyaxares and the Medes but saved 
by Madyes and the Scythians some twenty or more years before 
the Medes in alliance with Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, 
finally took it, c. 606 B.C. Much conjecture has been lavished 
upon the varying accounts which have reached us of the capture, 
but it seems probable that a heavy flood or the besiegers burst 
the great dam and while thus emptying the moats launched a 
flood against the west wall on the inside and thus breached the 
defences. 

It may be of interest to record the names of the governors of 
Nineveh: Nergal-mudammik. 835 B.C.; Ninib-mukin-ahi : 7910-761 
B.C.; Mahde, 725 B.C.; Nabu-dini-epush, 704 B.C.; Ahi-ilai, 649 
B.C., officiated as Eponyms for the year. 

If, as generally admitted, the ruins of Mespila and Larissa 
" described " by Xenophon, Anab. iii. 4, 7 sq. were those of 
Kuyunjik and Nimrud, we may conclude that there was no 
inhabited city on the spot at the time of the march of the Greeks 
with Cyrus (cf. Strabo xvi. p. 245). The name of Nineveh 
(Syriac Ninw§; Arabic Nlnawa, Nunawa) continued, even in the 
middle ages, to be applied to a site opposite Mosul on the east 
bank of the Tigris, where huge mounds and the traces of an 
ancient city wall bore witness of former greatness. Copious 
reference's to these mentions are collected in Tuch, De Nino Urbe 
(Leipzig, 1845). Ibn Jubair, p. 237 sq., followed by Ibn Batuta, 
ti- 137, gives a good description of the ruins and the great shrine 
of Jonah as existing in the 12th century. The name of Nlnawa 
applied, not to the ruins, but to the Rustak (fields and hamlets) 
on the site (Baladhuri, p. 331; Ibn Haukal, p. 145; Yaqut, 
ii. 694). 

A very complete summary of the traditions will be found in Lincke, 
" Assyrien und Nineveh," in Geschichte und Sage der Mittelmeervolker 
rtach 607-606. 

The explorations of Sir A. H. Layard at Kuyunjik (1845- 
1847 and 1840-1851) definitely located the city, in confirmation 
of ancient tradition and the identifications of Rich and others. 
Excavations were carried on by Rawlinson, 1853-1855; H. 
Rassam, 1854; G. Smith, 1873-1874 and 1876; Rassam again, 
1877-1883; E. A. Wailis Budge, 1888-1889; and King, 1902. 
The enormous mound of Kuyunjik now separated from that 
of Nebi-Yunus by the deep and rapid Khausar, marks the site 
of the palace of Sennacherib and Assur-bani-pal. The mound 
of Nebi-Yunus is crowned by the " Tomb of Jonah," a sacred 
shrine to the modern inhabitants, and could not be explored; 
but by sinking a shaft within the walls of a private house, some 
sculptured slabs were recovered, and the Turkish government 
later opened out part of a palace of Esarhaddon. Excavations 
at two of the great city gates showed them to have been erected 
by Sennacherib. 

Bibliography. — The architecture of these palaces is exhaustively 
treated in Ferguson's Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis Restored, 
and in Perrot and Chipiez, Art in Chaldea and Assyria. Each palace 
was in itself a fort, and the external walls are still 80 ft. high^ in 
places. The many topographical details furnished by exploration 
when compared with the building inscriptions and the indications 
given by deeds of sale will doubtless enable us ultimately to map 
out the principal features of the ancient city, but much more sys- 
tematic exploration is needed, as well as further publication of exist- 
ing documents. (C. H. W. J.) 

NING-PO (Ning-Po-Fu, i.e. City of the Peaceful Waves), a 
great city of China, the principal emporium of trade in the 
province of Chehkiang, standing in a fine plain bounded by 
mountains towards the west, on the left bank of the Ning-po 
river, about 16 m. fromits mouth, in 29 49' N., 121 35' E. It 
was visited by Portuguese traders as early as 1522, and is one of 
the five seaports which were thrown open to foreign trade in 
1842 by the treaty of Nanking. The population of the city and 
suburbs is estimated from 400,000 to 500,000. Ning-po is 
surrounded by a fine old wall, 25 ft. high and 16 ft. broad, pierced 
by six gates and two passages for ships in its circuit of 4 to 5 m. 
Just within the walls there is a considerable belt of open ground, 
and in many places the ramparts are thickly covered with 
jasmine and honeysuckle. In ascending the river a stranger's 
eye is first caught by the numerous huge ice-houses with high 
thatched roofs and by a tall white tower — the T'ien-feng-t'a or 
Ning-po pagoda or obelisk — which rises to a height of 160 ft. 
and has fourteen stories and seven tiers of windows, but has 
unfortunately been stripped of its galleries and otherwise 
damaged. Another striking structure in the heart of the city 

	xix. 23 

is the Drum Tower, dating from before the 15th century. As is 
natural in a place long celebrated for its religious and edu- 
cational pre-eminence, there is no lack of temples, monasteries 
and colleges, but few of these are of any architectural significance. 
Brick is the ordinary building material, and the dwelling-houses 
are mostly of one storey. Silks, cottons, carpets, furniture, 
white-wood carvings and straw hats are the chief products of 
the local industry. Large salt-works are carried on in the 
vicinity, and thousands of fishermen are engaged, mainly between 
April and July, in catching cuttle-fish. In spite of the powerful 
competition of Shanghai, Ning-po has a valuable foreign trade. 
It is regularly visited by the vessels of the China Navigation 
Company and the Chinese Merchants' Steam Navigation Com- 
pany. From 216,191 register tons in 1873 the tonnage of the 
port had increased to 303,109 in 1880, and in 1904 the figures 
rose to 532,869 tons. The value of the trade passing through the 
custom house in 1904 was £3 ,05 2, 6 2 9, as compared with £2,3 12,000 
in 1900 and £3,405,000 in 1880. Straw or grass hats, straw mats, 
samshu (from the Shao-sing district), Chinese drugs, vegetable 
tallow and fish are among the chief exports; in 1904 the hats 
numbered 2,125,566, though in 1863 they had only amounted to 
40,000, and the mats, mainly despatched to south China, average 
from 1 ,000,000, to 2,000,000. Missions are maintained in Ning-po 
by the Roman Catholic church, by the Church Missionary Society 
(1848), the American Presbyterians, the Reformed Wesleyans, 
the China Inland Mission (1857), &c. A mission hospital was 
instituted in 1843. After the storming of Chenhai — the fortified 
town at the mouth of the river — on the 10th of October 1841, 
the British forces quietly took possession of Ning-po on the 12th. 
In 1864 the T'aip'ings held the town for six months. 


NINIAN, ST, a Briton, probably from Strathclyde, who was 
trained at Rome and founded a church at Whithorn on the 
west side of Wigtown Bay. Whithorn has been identified with 
the Leukopibia of Ptolemy, but this is uncertain. Bede, writing 
three centuries after Ninian, ascribes the name Ad Candidam 
Casam to the fact that the church of Ninian was built of stone. 
We are told by Bede that St Ninian dedicated his church to St 
Martin of Tours, who died between 397 and 400, but Ailred of 
Rievaulx is our only authority for the statement that St Martin 
supplied him with masons. The population of the north shore 
of the Soiway Firth at the beginning of the 5th century were 
probably either Picts or Goidels or a blend of both, and naturally 
hostile to the Romanized Britons. Bede records that Ninian 
preached among the Picts within the Mounth, which indicates 
that he was acquainted with the Pictish language. The legends 
of his work in Ireland probably arise from the influence exercised 
in that country by the church of Whithorn. The date of Ninian 's 
death is given by Archbishop Ussher as 432, but there is no 
authority for this statement. 

See Bede, Hist. EccL (ed. C. Plummer, Oxford, 1896), iii., iv.; 
Ailred of Rievaulx, " Life of St Ninian," in the Historians of Scotland 
vol. v. (Edinburgh, 1874); W. F. Skene, Celtic Scotland (Edinburgh, 
1877), ii. 2 ff.; and J. Rhys, Celtic Britain (London, 1904), p. 173. 


NINIB, the ideographic designation of a solar deity of Baby- 
lonia. The phonetic designation is uncertain — perhaps Annshit. 
The cult of Ninib can be traced back to the oldest period of 
Babylonian history. In the inscriptions found at Shirgulla (or 
Shirpurla, also known as Lagash), he appears as Nin-girsu, that 
is, " the lord of Girsu," which appears to have been a quarter of 
Shirgulla. He is closely associated with Bel (q.v.), or En-lil of 
Nippur, as whose son he is commonly designated. The com- 
bination points to the amalgamation of the district in which 
Ninib was worshipped with the one in which Bel was the chief 
deity. This district may have been Shirgulla and surrounding 
places, which, as we know, fell at one time under the control 
of the rulers of Nippur. 

Ninib appears in a double capacity in the epithets bestowed 
on him, and in the hymns and incantations addressed to him. 
On the one hand he is the healing god who releases from sickness 
and the ban of the demons in general, and on the other he is the 
god of war and of the chase, armed with terrible weapons. It is 
not easy to reconcile these two phases, except on the assumption 
that he has absorbed in his person various minor solar deities, 
representing different phases of the sun, just as subsequently 
Shamash absorbed the attributes of practically all the minor 
sun-deities. 

In the systematized pantheon, Ninib survives the tendency 
towards centralizing all sun cults in Shamash by being made the 
symbol of a certain phase of the sun. Whether this phase is 
that of the morning sun or of the springtime with which bene- 
ficent qualities are associated, or that of the noonday sun or of 
the summer solstice, bringing suffering and destruction in its 
wake, is still a matter of dispute, with the evidence on the whole 
in favour of the former proposition. At the same time, the 
possibility of a confusion between Ninib and Nergal (q.v .) must 
be admitted, and perhaps we are to see the solution of the 
problem in the recognition of two diverse schools of theological 
speculation, the one assigning to Ninib the role of the spring- tide 
solar deity, the other identifying him with the sun of the summer 
solstice. In the astral-theological system Ninib becomes the 
planet Saturn. The swine seems to have been the animal sacred 
to him, or to have been one of the symbols under which he is 
represented. The consort of Ninib was Gula^.r.). (M. Ja.) 


NINUS, in "Greek mythology, the eponymous founder of 
Nineveh (5.2.), and thus the city itself personified. He was 
said to have been the son of Belos or Bel, to have conquered 
in seventeen years the whole of western Asia with the help of 
Ariaeus, king of Arabia, and to have founded the first empire. 
During the siege of Bactra he met Semiramis, the wife of one 
of his officers, Onnes, whom he took from her husband and 
married. The fruit of the marriage was Ninyas, i.e. " The 
Ninevite." After the death of Ninus, Semiramis, who was 
accused of causing it, erected to him a temple-tomb, nine stades 
high and ten stades broad, near Babylon. According to Castor 
(ap.Syncell. p. 167) his reign lasted fifty-two years, its commence- 
ment falling 2189 B.C. according to Ctesias. Another Ninus 
is described by some authorities as the last king of Nineveh, 
successor of Sardanapalus. 
See J. Gilmore, Fragments of the Persika of Ktesias (1888). 


NIOBE, in Greek mythology, daughter of Tantalus and Dione, 
wife of Amphion, king of Thebes. Proud of her numerous 
family, six daughters and six sons, she boasted of her superiority 
to her friend Leto, the mother of only two children, Apollo 
and Artemis. As a punishment, Apollo slew her sons and 
Artemis her daughters. Their bodies lay for nine days unburied, 
for Zeus had changed the people to stone; on the tenth day 
they were buried by the gods. Out of pity for her grief, the gods 
changed Niobe herself into a rock on Mount Sipylus in Phrygia, 
in which form she continued to weep (Homer, Iliad, xxiv. 
602-617; Apollodorus iii. 5; Ovid, Metam. vi. 146-312). The 
names and number of her children, and the time and place 
of their death, are variously given. This " Niobe," described 
by Pausanias (i. 21) and Quintus Smyrnaeus (i. 293-306), both 
natives of the district, was the appearance assumed by a cliff on 
Sipylus when seen from a distance and from the proper point 
of view (see Jebb on Sophocles, Antigone , 831). It is to be 
distinguished from an archaic figure still visible, carved in the 
northern side of the mountain near Magnesia, to which tradition 
has given the name of Niobe, but which is really intended for 
Cybele. 

According to some, Niobe is the goddess of snow and winter, 
whose children, slain by Apollo and Artemis, symbolize the ice 
and snow melted by the sun in spring; according to others, 
she is an earth-goddess, whose progeny — vegetation and the 
fruits of the soil — is dried up and slain every summer by the 
shafts of the sun-god. Burmeister regards the legend as an 
incident in the struggle between the followers of Dionysus and 
Apollo in Thebes, in which the former were defeated and driven 
back to Lydia. Heffter builds up the story round the dripping 
rock in Lydia, really representing an Asiatic goddess, but taken 
by the Greeks for an ordinary woman. Enmann, who interprets 
the name as " she who prevents increase " (in contrast to Leto, 
who made women prolific), considers the main point of the myth 
to be Niobe's loss of her children. He compares her story with 
that of Lamia, who, after her children had been slain by Zeus/ 
retired to a lonely cave and carried off and killed the children 
of others. The appearance of- the rock on Sipylus gave rise to 
the story of Niobe having been turned to stone. The tragedians 
used her story to point the moral of the instability of human 
happiness; Niobe became the representative of human nature, 
liable to pride in prosperity and forge tfulness of the respect and 
submission due to the gods. 

The tragic story of Niobe was a favourite subject in literature 
and art. Aeschylus and Sophocles wrote tragedies upon it; 
Ovid has described it at length in his Metamorphoses* In art, 
the most famous representation was a marble group of Niobe 
and her children, taken by Sosius to Rome and set up in the 
temple of Apollo Sosianus (Pliny, Nat. Hist, xxxvi. 4). What 
is probably a Roman imitation of this work was found in 1 583 
near the Lateran, and is now in the Uffizi gallery at Florence. 
In ancient times it was disputed whether the original was the 
work of Praxiteles or Scopas, and modern authorities are not 
agreed as to its identity with the group mentioned by Pliny. 

On the whole subject see C.E. Burmeister, Defabula quae de Niobe 
ejusque liberis agit (Wismar, 1836); L. Curtze, Fabula Niobes 
Thebanae (Corbach, 1836); W. Heffter in Zeitschrift fur Gymnasial- 
wesen, ix. (1855); C. B. Stark, Niobe und die Niobiaen (186$), the 
standard work; E. Thramer, Pergamos (1"" 
C. Friederichs, 
Praxiteles und die Niobegruppe (1865); A. Mayerhofer and H. 
Ohlrich, Die Florentiner Ntobegruppe (1881 and 1888); for the Niobe 
on Mount Sipylus, see C. B. Stark, Nach dent griechischen Orient 
(1874); G. Weber, Le Sipylos et ses monuments (1880); W. Ramsay, 
14 Sipylos and Cybele," in Journal of Hellenic Studies, III. (1882); 
Frazer's Pausanias, iii. 555; for vase-paintings, see H. Heyde- 
mann, Niobe und Niobiden auf griechischen Vasenbildern (1875). 
For further literature on the subject, see A. Preuner's mythological 
bibliography in C. Bursian's Janresbericht uber die Fortschritte der 
klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, vol. xxv. (1891); the various 
derivations of the name and interpretations of the legend are given 
in Enmann's article in Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie. 

In Greek Art, fig. 29 (from an Orvieto vase) represents the 
slaying of the children of Niobe by Apollo and Artemis; fig. 78 
(PL VI.), Niobe shielding her youngest daughter. 


NIORT, a city of western France, chief town of the department 
of Deux-Sevres, 42 m. E.N.E. of La Rochelle on the railway 
to Saumur. Pop. (1906) 20,538. Niort is situated on the left 
bank of the Sevre Niortaise, partly in the valley and partly on 
the slopes of the enclosing hills. The tower of the church of 
Notre-Dame (15th and 16th centuries) has a spire 246 ft. high, 
with bell-turrets adorned with statues of the evangelists, and 
at the base a richly decorated dais in the Renaissance style; 
and the north doorway shows a balustrade, of which the balusters 
form the inscription Mater Dei, memento mei. St Andr6, 
with a fine window in the apse, and St Hilaire, which contains 
some beautiful frescoes, both date from the 19th century. Of 
the old castle, whose site is partly occupied by the prefecture, 
there remains the donjon — two large square towers united by 
a central building, flanked by turrets, built, it is said, by Henry 
II. of England or Richard Cceur de Lion. The platform on the 
top affords a fine view of the public garden (one of the most 
picturesque in France) and the valley of the Sevre. The old 
town-hall, Renaissance in style, is wrongly known as the Alienor 
palace, after Eleanor of Guienne; it contains a collection of 
antiquities. The house is still shown in which Madame de 
Maintenon is erroneously stated to have been born. Near Niort 
are the fine feudal ruins of the fortress of Coudray-Salbart. 

Niort is the seat of a prefect and a court of assizes, and has 
tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a board of trade- 
arbitration, lyc6es for both sexes, a school of drawing, a chamber 
of commerce and a branch of the Bank of France. Tanning, 
currying, shammy-dressing, glove-making and the manufacture 
of brushes and boots and shoes are the staple industries. 

Up to the 7th century the Niort plain formed part of the Gulf 
of Poitou; and the mouth of the Sevre lay at the foot of the hills 
now occupied by the town which grew up round the castle 
erected by Henry Plantagenet in 1 1 55. The place was captured 
by Louis VIII. in 1224. By the peace of BrStigny it was ceded 
to the English; but its inhabitants revolted against the Black 
Prince, and most of them were massacred when his troops 
recovered the town by assault. In 1373 Duguesclin regained 
possession of the town for the French. Protestantism made 
numerous proselytes at Niort, and Gaspard de Coligny made 
himself master of the town, which successfully resisted the 
Catholic forces after the Battle of Jarnac, but surrendered without 
striking a blow after that of Moncontour. Henry IV. rescued 
it from the League. It suffered severely by the revocation of 
the edict of Nantes. 


NIPIGON [Neepigon, or NEPiGON],a lake and river of Thunder 
Bay district, Ontario, Canada. The lake is 30 m. N. of the bay 
of the same name on Lake Superior, at an altitude of 852 ft. 
above the sea. It is 70 m. long and 50 m. wide; contains over 
1000 islands, is very deep, and has a much-indented shore-line 
measuring upwards of 580 m. The river, which drains the lake, 
descends several hundred feet in the 40 m. of its course and is the 
largest stream flowing into Lake Superior. It is widely known 
for the excellence of its trout fishing. 


NIPISSING, a lake of the district of the same name in Ontario, 
Canada, situated nearly midway between Lake Huron and the 
Ottawa river, at an altitude of 644 ft. above the sea. It is of 
irregular shape, with bold shores, and contains many islands; 
from the north it receives the waters of Sturgeon river. It is 
50 m. in length and 20 in breadth; discharges its waters by 
French river into Lake Huron, and is separated by a low water- 
shed from the Mattawa river, a tributary of the Ottawa. It has 
been proposed as the summit level of the projected Ottawa and 
Georgian Bay canal, an important project rendered difficult by 
the numerous rapids both on French river and on the Ottawa. 
With the Ottawa, Mattawa and French, it formed the old 
voyageur route from Montreal to the Great Lakes. 


NIPPUR, one of the most ancient of all the Babylonian cities 
of which we have any knowledge, the special seat of the worship 
of the Sumerian god, En-lil, lord of the storm demons. It was 
situated on both sides of the Shatt-en-Nil canal, one of the 
earliest courses of the Euphrates, between the present bed of that 
river and the Tigris, almost 100 m. S.E. of Bagdad, in 32 7' N. 
45 io' E. It is represented by the great complex of ruin mounds 
known to the Arabs as Nuffar, written by the earlier explorers 
Niffer, divided into two main parts by the dry bed of the old 
Shatt-en-Nil (Arakhat). The highest point of these ruins, a 
conical hill rising about 100 ft. above the level of the surrounding 
plain, N.E. of the canal bed, is called by the Arabs Bint el-Amir 
or "prince's daughter." Here very brief and unsatisfactory 
excavations were conducted by Sir A. H. Layard in 1851, which 
served, however, by means of the inscribed bricks discovered, 
to identify the site. The university of Pennsylvania began 
systematic excavations in 1889 under the directorship of Dr John 
P. Peters. With some intermissions these excavations were 
continued until 1 900 under the original director and his successors, 
Dr John Henry Haynes and Dr H. V. Hilprecht. The result of 
their work is a fairly continuous history of Nippur, and especially 
of its great temple, E-kur, from the earliest period. 

Originally a village of reed huts in the marshes, similar to many 
of those which can be seen in that region to-day, Nippur under- 
went the usual vicissitudes of such villages — floods and conflagra- 
tions. For some reason habitation persisted at the same spot, 
and gradually the site rose above the marshes, partly as a result 
of the mere accumulation of debris, consequent on continuous 
habitation, partly through the efforts of the inhabitants. As 
these began to develop in civilization, they substituted, at least 
so far as their shrine was concerned, buildings of mud-brick for 
reed huts. The earliest age of civilization, which we may 
designate as the clay age, is marked by rude, hand-made pottery 
and thumb-marked bricks, flat on one side, concave on the other, 
gradually developing through several fairly marked stages. The 
exact form of the sanctuary at that period cannot be determined, 
but it seems to have been in some way connected with the burning 
of the dead, and extensive remains of such cremation are found 
in all the earlier, pre-Sargonic strata. There is evidence of the 
succession on this site of different peoples, varying somewhat 
in their degrees of civilization. One stratum is marked by painted 
pottery of good make, similar to that found in a corresponding 
stratum in Susa, and resembling the early pottery of the Aegean 
region more closely than any later pottery found in Babylonia. 
This people gave way in time to another, markedly inferior in 
the manufacture of pottery, but superior, apparently, as builders. 
In one of these earlier strata, of very great antiquity, there was 
discovered, in connexion with the shrine, a conduit built of bricks, 
in the form of an arch. Somewhere, apparently, in the 4th 
millennium B.C., we begin to find inscriptions written on clay, 
in an almost linear script, in the Sumerian tongue. The shrine 
at this time stood on a raised platform and apparently contained, 
as a characteristic feature, an artificial mountain or peak, a 
so-called ziggurat, the precise shape and size of which we are, 
however, unable to determine. So far as we can judge from the 
inscriptions, Nippur did not enjoy at this time, or at any later 
period for that matter, political hegemony, but was distinctively 
a sacred city, important from the possession of the famous shrine 
of En-lil. Inscriptions of Lugal-zaggisi and Lugal-kigub-nidudu, 
kings of Erech and Ur respectively, and of other early pre-Semitic 
rulers, on door-sockets and stone vases, show the veneration in 
which the ancient shrine was then held and the importance 
attached to its possession, as giving a certain stamp of legitimacy. 
So on their votive offerings some of these rulers designate them- 
selves as patestSy or over-priests, of En-lil. Early in the 3rd 
millennium B.C. the city was conquered and occupied by the 
Semitic rulers of Akkad, or Agade, and numerous votive objects 
of Alu-usharsid (Urumush or Rimush), Sargon and Naram-Sin 
testify to the veneration in which they also held this sanctuary. 
En-lil was in fact adopted as the Bel or great lord of the Semitic 
pantheon. The last monarch of this dynasty, Naram-Sin, 
rebuilt both the temple and the city walls, and in the accumula- 
tion of d6bris now marking the ancient site his remains are found 
about half way from the top to the bottom. To this Akkadian 
occupation succeeded an occupation by the first Semitic dynasty 
of Ur, and the constructions of Ur-Gur or Ur-Engur, the great 
builder of Babylonian temples, are superimposed immediately 
upon the constructions of Naram-Sin. Ur-Gur gave to the temple 
its final characteristic form. Partly razing the constructions of 
his predecessors, he erected a terrace of unbaked bricks, some 
40 ft. high, covering a space of about 8 acres, near the north- 
western edge of which, towards the western corner, he built a 
ziggurat, or stage-tower, of three stages of unburned brick, faced 
with kiln-burned bricks laid in bitumen. On the summit of this 
artificial mountain stood, apparently, as at Ur and Eridu, a small 
chamber, the special shrine or abode of the god. Access to the 
stages of the ziggurat, from the court beneath, was had by an 
inclined plane on the south-east side. To the north-east of the 
ziggurat stood, apparently, the House of Bel, and in the courts 
below the ziggurat stood various other buildings, shrines, treasure 
chambers and the like. The whole structure was roughly 
orientated, with the corners towards the cardinal points of the 
compass. Ur-Gur also rebuilt the walls of the city in general on 
the line of Naram-Sin's walls. 

The restoration of the general features of the temple of 
this and the immediately succeeding periods has been greatly 
facilitated by the discovery of a sketch map on a fragment of 
a clay tablet. This sketch map represents a quarter of the city 
to the eastward of the Shatt-en-Nil canal, which was enclosed 
within its own walls, a city within a city, forming an irregular 
square, with sides roughly 2700 ft. long, separated from the other 
quarters of the city, as from the surrounding country to the north 
and east, by canals on all sides, with broad quays along the walls. 
A smaller canal divided this quarter of the city itself into two 
parts, in the south-eastern part of which, in the middle of its 
S.E. side, stood the temple, while in the N.W. part, along the 
Shatt-en-Nil, two great storehouses are indicated. The temple 
proper, according to this plan, consisted of an outer and inner 
court (each covering approximately 8 acres), surrounded by 
double walls, with ziggurat on the north-western edge of the 
latter. 

The temple continued to be built upon or rebuilt by kings of 
various succeeding dynasties, as shown by bricks and votive 
objects bearing the inscriptions of the kings of various dynasties 
of Ur and Isin. It seems to have suffered severely in some 
manner at or about the time of the Elamite invasions, as shown 
by broken fragments of statuary, votive vases and the like, 
from that period, but at the same time to have won recognition 
from the Elamite conquerors, so that Eriaku (Sem. Rim-Sin, 
biblical Arioch), the Elamite king of Larsa, styles himself " shep- 
herd of the land of Nippur." With the establishment of the 
Babylonian empire, under Khammurabi, early "in the 2nd pre- 
Christian millennium, the religious as well as the political centre 
of influence was transferred to Babylon, Marduk became the 
Bel or lord of the pantheon, many of En-hTs attributes and 
myths were transferred to him, and E-kur was to some extent 
neglected. Under the succeeding Cossaean dynasty, however, 
shortly after the middle of the 2nd millennium, E-kur was 
restored once more to its former splendour, several monarchs of 
that dynasty built upon and adorned it, and thousands of in- 
scriptions, dating from the time of those rulers, have been 
discovered in its archives. After the middle of the 12th century 
follows another long period of comparative neglect, but with the 
conquest of Babylonia by the Assyrian Sargon, at the close of the 
8th century B.C., we meet again with building inscriptions, and 
under Assur-bani-pal, about the middle of the 7th century, we 
find E-kur restored with a splendour greater than ever before, 
the ziggurat of that period being 190 ft. by 128 ft. After tbat 
E-kur appears to have gradually fallen into decay, until finally, 
in the Seleucid period, the ancient temple was turned into a 
fortress. Huge walls were erected at the edges of the ancient 
terrace, the courts of the temple were filled with houses and streets, 
and the ziggurat itself was curiously built over in a cruciform shape, 
and converted into an acropolis for the fortress. This fortress 
was occupied and further built upon until the close of the 
Parthian period, about a.d. 250; but under the succeeding rule 
of the Sassanids it in its turn fell into decay, and the ancient 
sanctuary became, to a considerable extent, a mere place of 
sepulture, only a little village of mud huts huddled about the 
ancient ziggurat continuing to be inhabited. The store-house 
quarter of the temple town had not been explored as late as 1909. 

As at Tello, so at Nippur, the clay archives of the temple were 
found not in the temple proper, but on an outlying mound. 
South-eastward of the temple quarter, without the walls above 
described, and separated from it by a large basin connected with 
the Shatt-en-Nil, lay a triangular mound, about 25 ft. in average 
height and 13 acres in extent. In this were found large numbers 
of inscribed clay tablets (it is estimated that upward of 40,000 
tablets and fragments have been excavated in this mound alone), 
dating from the middle of the 3rd millennium B.C. onward into 
the Persian period, partly temple archives, partly school exer- 
cises and text-books, partly mathematical tables, with a consider- 
able number of documents of a more distinctly literary character. 
For an account of one of the most interesting fragments of a 
literary or religious character, found at Nippur, see below. 

The great complex of ruin mounds lying S.W. of the Shatt-en- 
Nil canal, larger in extent and mass than the N.E. complex, 
had not up to 1909 been so fully explored as the mounds to 
the N.E. Almost directly opposite the temple, however, a large 
palace was excavated, apparently of the Cossaean period, and in 
this neighbourhood and further southward on these mounds 
large numbers of inscribed tablets of various periods, including 
temple archives of the Cossaean and commercial archives of the 
Persian period, were excavated. The latter, the " books and 
papers " of the house of Murashu, commercial agents of the 
government, throw light on the condition of the city and the 
administration of the country in the Persian period, the 5th 
century B.C. The former give us a very good idea of the admini- 
stration of an ancient temple. The whole city of Nippur appears 
to have been at that time merely an appanage of the temple. 
, The temple itself was a great landowner, possessed of both farms 
and pasture land. Its tenants were obliged to render careful 
accounts of their administration of the property entrusted to their 
care, which were preserved in the archives of the temple. We 
have also from these archives lists of goods contained in the 
temple treasuries and salary lists of temple officials, on tablet forms 
specially prepared and marked off for periods of a year or less. 
On the upper surface of these mounds was found a considerable 
Jewish town, dating from about the beginning of the Arabic 
period onward to the 10th century a.d., in the houses of which 
were large numbers of incantation bowls. 7 ew ish names, 
appearing in the Persian documents discovered at Nippur, show, 
however, that Jewish settlement at that city dates in fact from 
a much earlier period, and the discovery on some of the tablets 
found there of the name of the canal Kabari suggests that the 
Jewish settlement of the exile, on the canal Chebar, to which 
Ezekiel belonged, may have been somewhere in this neighbour- 
hood, if not at Nippur itself. Hilprecht indeed believes that the 
Kabari was the Shatt-en-Nil. Of the history and conditions of 
Nippur in the Arabic period we learn little from the excavations, 
but from outside sources it appears that the city was the seat 
of a Christian bishopric as late as the 12th century a.d. 

The excavations at Nippur were the first to reveal to us the 
extreme antiquity of Babylonian civilization, and, as already 
stated, they give us the best consecutive record of the develop- 
ment of that civilization, with a continuous occupancy from a 
period of unknown antiquity, long ante-dating 5000 B.C., onward 
to the middle ages. But while Nippur has been more fully ex- 
plored than any other old Babylonian city, except Babylon and 
Lagash, still only a small part of the great ruins of the ancient site 
had been examined in 1909. These ruins have been particularly 
fruitful in inscribed material, especially clay tablets, many of 
them from the very earliest periods; but little of artistic or 
architectural importance has been discovered. Excavation at 
Nippur is particularly difficult and costly by reason of the in- 
accessibility of the site, and the dangerous and unsettled con- 
dition of the surrounding country, and still more by reason of the 
immense mass of later debris under which the .earlier and more 
important Babylonian remains are buried. 

See A. H. Layard, Nineveh and Babylon (1853); John P. Peters, 
Nippur (1897); H. V. Hilprecht, Excavations in Assyria and Baby- 
lonia (1904); Clarence S. Fisher, Excavations at Nippur (lst part 
1905, 2nd part 1906); Babylonian Expedition of the University of 
Pennsylvania, a monumental edition of the cuneiform texts found 
at Nippur, with brief introductions and notes of a more general 
character (1893 foil.). For a plan of the Parthian palace see 
Architecture, vol. ii. p. 381. 0- P- P E -) 

The Nippur Deluge Fragment — From among the many 
tablets and fragments of tablets discovered at Nippur one of more 
than ordinary interest was published in 1910. Though mutilated 
portions of only a few of its lines have been preserved, and 
the text contains no proper name, it is clear that the tablet 
represents part of a Babylonian version of the Deluge Legend. 1 
The portion of the story covered by the text relates to the 
warning given by Ea to Ut-napishtim, the Babylonian equivalent 
of the Hebrew Noah. The god here states that he is about to 
send a deluge, which will cause destruction to all mankind, and 
he gives directions for the building of a great ship in which " the 
beasts of the field and the birds of heaven " may be saved, along 
with Ut-napishtim and his family; he fixes the size of the ship and 
directs that it should be covered with a strong roof or deck. The 
text bears a general resemblance to the two well-known Assyrian 
versions on tablets in the British Museum, but it has been claimed 
that its phraseology presents a closer parallel to the biblical 
version of the Deluge story in the " Priestly Code." For several 
years the existence of Babylonian versions of the legend had been 
detected among collections of tablets dating from the earlier 
historical periods. A fragment of one such version belongs to 
the period of the First Dynasty of Babylon, 2 and -part of a still 
earlier Semitic version of another portion of the Gilgamesh 
Epic has also been recovered. 3 The new fragment from Nippur 
has given rise to considerable discussion, in view of the light it 

	1 See Hilprecht, The Babylonian Expedition of the University of 
	Pennsylvania, ser. D, vol. v. fasc. 1. 

	2 It is dated in the reign of Ammizaduga; cf. Scheil, Recueil de 
	travaux, xx. 55 ff. For another fragment of the Atar-khasis legend 
	of the same period, see Cuneiform Texts in the British Museum, pt. vi. t 
	and cf. Zimmern, Zeits. fur Assyr. xiv. 278 f. 

	3 See Meissner, Mitteil. der Vorderas. Cesellschaft (1002), i. For 
	other Semitic legends of this early period, see Cuneiform Texts in 
	the British Museum, pt. xv. (1902), Pis. I.-VI., and cf. King, The 
	Seven Tablets of Creation, p. lxxvii. f. 

is said to throw upon a disputed problem of biblical criticism. 
According to its discoverer it represents the oldest account of the 
Babylonian Deluge story extant; and he considers it of funda- 
mental importance for determining the age of Israel's earliest 
traditions, since he would regard it as having been written 
" before Abraham had left his Babylonian home in Ur of the 
Chaldees." 

Beyond the fact that it was found at Nippur during the fourth 
of the American expeditions, there does not appear to be any 
exact record of its provenance; and, in order to determine its 
date, it is necessary to rely on the external and internal evidence 
furnished by the tablet itself. A number of hymns and prayers 
addressed to the chief Babylonian gods, and written throughout 
in the Sumerian language, have been found at Nippur, and these 
may be dated in the era of the kings of Ur and Isin, since some 
of them are mentioned by name in the petitions. To the latter 
part of this period Professor* Hilprecht would assign the new 
Deluge fragment. It is natural that under the Sumerian revival, 
which characterized the united kingdom of Sumer and Akkad, the 
ancient ritual should have been revived and the Sumerian service- 
books adapted for the use of the reigning monarch. Sumerian, in 
fact, predominated, not only on the historical monuments, but 
also throughout the religious literature, a fact which militates 
against assigning the newly discovered Semitic legend to the 
period of these early Sumerian texts. It has already been noted 
that the earliest deluge-fragment previously recovered dates from 
the latter half of the First Dynasty of Babylon, when the Western 
Semites had succeeded in establishing their authority through- 
out the greater part of the country. But, to judge from the 
photographic reproduction of the Nippur tablet, the characters 
upon it do not appear to resemble those in use at the time of the 
First Dynasty, nor those of the period of the Dynasties of Ur and 
Isin. On purely epigraphic grounds the suggestion has indeed 
been made that it should be assigned to the Kassite period (not 
earlier than 1700 B.C.), during which a very large number of the 
tablets found at Nippur were inscribed. 1 

But, even so, the fragment is one of the most interesting that, 
has been recovered on the site of Nippur. For it strikingly 
illustrates the fact that the temple of En-lil, like that of the 
Sun-god at Sippar and the other great temples in Babylonia, 
possessed a body of mythological and religious texts, which 
formed subjects for study and comment among the priestly 
scribes. It was by the collection and reproduction of such 
documents, preserved in the ancient religious centres, that Assur- 
bani-pal was enabled to form his unique library of tablets at 
Nineveh. The temple of E-kur thus formed no exception to the 
rule that the great temples of Babylonia were centres of literary, 
as well as of religious, activity. 

The text of this Deluge fragment also furnishes one more proof of 
the existence of parallel versions of the same legend. In some in- 
stances, as in the great Creation Series of Babylon, the later scribes 
subjected the different versions to processes of editing, with the 
result that the earlier forms gave place to the redactions of a militant 
priesthood. But where no theological nor local prejudices were 
involved, the tendency to a faithful reproduction of the earlier texts 
prevailed. Thus the resemblances which have been claimed between 
the Nippur Deluge fragment and the version of the " Priestly Code " 
in Genesis, in themselves furnish no significant evidence as to the 
latter's date. The possibility that Hebrew traditions were subject 
to Babylonian influence from the period of the Canaanite conquest 
has long been recognized, and to the Exilic and post-Exilic Jew 
the mythology of Babylon may well have presented many familiar 
features. (L. W. K.) 


NIRIZ, or NairIz, a district and town in the province of Fars, 
Persia. The district has 24 villages and extends from near 
Istahbamat, south of the Bakhtegan lake, to about 50 m. E. 
Water is scarce and the plain is not much cultivated in con- 
sequence. The produce consists of some grain, cotton, tobacco, 
&c, but fruit is more abundant. Here, as in the neighbouring 
Darab district, villages situated in the hills are called madan 
(mine), and some travellers have in their itineraries indicated a 
mine in localities where there is none. 

	1 It has also been pointed out that the employment of the sign PI 
	for wa and the use of z for s, cited in support of the earlier date, 
	survived in the Kassite period. 

The town of NIrIz is situated in a plain 7 m. from the south- 
eastern point of the lake, and about 130 m. from Shiraz, and has 
a population of about 9000. The people of Nlriz were stanch 
followers of the Bab (see BAbiism), and rose against the govern- 
ment in 1850 and in 1852, with disastrous results. Nlriz was 
formerly known for its manufactureof steel from iron ore brought 
from Parpa, 40 m. E. 


NIRVANA, the term in Buddhist theology, meaning literally 
" blowing out "or" dying out," Skt. nirvd, " to blow," for a calm 
or sinless state or condition of the mind reached by a dying out or 
extinction of sin (see Buddhism). 


NISARD, JEAN MARIE NAPOLEON D&IRfS (1806-1888), 
French author and critic, was born at Chatillon-sur-Seine on the 
20th of March 1806. In 1826 he joined the staff of the Journal 
des Dibats, but subsequently transferred his pen to the National. 
Under the empire he was inspector-general of education (1852) 
and director of the £cole normale (1857-1867). His literary 
reputation was effectually established by his Histoire de la 
littirature jrancaise (1844-1861), which secured his election to 
the Academy (1850). His other works include £tudes d'histoire 
et de literature (1 850-1 864), and Les Quatres grands historiens 
latins (1875). In all his books he vigorously supported the 
claims of classicism against romanticism. He died at San Remo 
on the 27th of March 1888. 


NISBETT, LOUISA CRANSTOUN (1812-1858), English actress, 
was the daughter of Frederick Hayes Macnamara, an actor, whose 
stage name was Mordaunt. As Miss Mordaunt she had con- 
siderable experience, especially in Shakesperean leading parts, 
before her first London appearance in 1829 at Drury Lane as 
Widow Cheerly in Andrew Cherry's (1762-1812) Soldier's 
Daughter. Her beauty and high spirits made her at once a 
popular favourite in a large number of comedy parts, until in 
1 83 1 she was married to Captain John Alexander Nisbett and 
retired. Her husband, however, was killed the same year by a 
fall from his horse, and she was compelled to reappear on the 
stage in 1 83 2. She was the original Lady Gay Spanker of London 
Assurance (1841). In 1844 she withdrew again from the stage 
to marry Sir William Boothby, Bart., but on his death (1846), 
returned to play Lady Teazle, Portia, Constantine in the Love 
Chase, Helen and Julia in the Hunchback. It was in the first of 
these parts that she made her final appearance in 1851. She 
died on the 15th of January 1858. 


NISH (also written Nisch and Nis), the capital of the Nish 
department of Servia, lying in a plain among the southern 
mountains, on the left shore of the Nishava, a tributary of the 
Morava. Pop. (1900) 24,451. Among Servian cities, Nish is 
only surpassed by Belgrade in commercial and strategic import- 
ance; for it lies at the point where several of the chief Balkan 
highroads converge, and where the branch railway to Salonica 
leaves the main line between Belgrade and Constantinople. 
The administration of the Servian railways has its factory for 
repairing engines and principal store of materials in the city, 
which also possesses an iron foundry. The king and the govern- 
ment reside for at least three months in the year in Nish, where 
also the national assembly, before the constitution of 1 901, was 
regularly held. It is the see of a bishop, the seat of the district 
prefecture and a tribunal, and the headquarters of the territorial 
militia corps, having besides a large number of regular troops 
in garrison. There is a small obsolete fortress on the right bank 
of the Nishava, believed to have been erected on the site of 
the Roman Naissus. The surrounding hills (Vinik, Goritsa, 
Kamenitsa) were, after 18S6, fortified by modern earthworks. 

After the Turks were driven from the city in 1878, it was in 
many respects modernized; but something of its former character 
is preserved in the ancient Turkish palace, mosque and fountain, 
the maze of winding alleys and picturesque houses in the older 
quarters, and, on market days, by the medley of peasant costumes 
— Bulgarian, Albanian and Rumanian, as well as Servian. 

The ancient Roman city Naissus was mentioned as an im- 
portant place by Ptolemy of Alexandria. Under its walls was 
fought in a.d. 269 the great battle in which Emperor Claudius 
destroyed the army of the Goths. It was at Naissus that 
Constantine the Great was born in a.d. 2 74. Though the emperor 
Julian improved its defences, the town was destroyed by the Huns 
under Attila, in the 5th century, but Justinian did his best to 
restore it. In the 9th century the Bulgarians became masters of 
Naissus, but had to cede it to the Hungarians in the 1 ith century, 
from whom the Byzantine emperor Manuel I. reconquered it in 
1 1 73. Towards the end of the 12th century the town was in the 
hands of the Servian prince Stephen Nemanya, who there received 
hospitably the German emperor Frederic Barbarossa and his 
Crusaders. In 1375 the Turks captured Naissus for the first time 
from the Servians. In 1443 the allied armies of the Hungarians 
under Hunyady and the Servians under George Brankovich, 
retook it from the Turks, but in 1 456 it again came under Turkish 
dominion, and remained for more than 300 years the most 
important Turkish military station on the road between Hungary 
and Constantinople. In the frequent wars between Austria and 
Turkey during the 1 7th and 18th centuries the Austrians captured 
Naissus twice (in 1689 and 1737), but were not able to retain it 
long. The Servians having, in the beginning of the 1 9th century, 
successfully cleared Servia of Turks, were emboldened to attack 
Nish in 1809, but were repulsed with great loss. The Turks raised 
as a monument of their victory a high tower composed entirely 
of the heads of the Servians slain in the battle of Nish. The 
remnants of this monument are still kept up. It stands half a mile 
to the east from Nish, and is called to this day by the Turkish 
name " Tyele-Koula," " the Tower of Skulls." In the Russo- 
Turkish War the Servian army, under the personal command 
of King Milan, besieged Nish, and forced it to capitulate on the 
10th January 1878. The Berlin congress decided that it should 
remain with Servia. (C. Mi.) 


NISHAPUR, a province of Persia, situated between Meshed and 
Sabzevar, in northern Khorasan. The older name of the district 
was Abarshehr. It has a population of from 130,000 to 140,000, 
is divided into twelve districts, and pays a yearly revenue 
of about £12,000. It produces much grain and cotton, and is 
considered one of the most fertile districts of Persia. One of its 
subdivisions is that of Bar-i-Madan, with chief place Madan 
(situated 32 m. N.W. of the city of Nishapur, at an elevation of 
5100 ft., in 36 28' N., 58 20' E.), where the famous mines are 
which have supplied the world with turquoises for at least 2000 
years. The province used to be one of the administrative 
divisions of Khorasan, but is now a separate province, with a 
governor appointed by the shah. 


NISHApOR (Old Pers. Nev-shapur-nev, New Pers. nlv, nlk~ 
good; Arab. Naisabur), the capital of the province of Nishapur, 
Persia, situated at an elevation of 3920 ft., in 36 12' N., and 
58 40' E., about 49 m. west of Meshed. The second element of 
the name is that of the traditional founder Shapur, or Sapor of 
the Western historians. Some accounts name the first (241-272), 
others the second Shapur (300-379). It was once one of the four 
great cities of Khorasan, rivalling Rai (Rhages), " the mother 
of cities," in importance and population, but is now a small 
and comparatively unimportant place with a population of 
barely 1 5,000. It has post and telegraph offices and a lively trade 
in wool, cotton and dry fruits (almonds, pistachios). 

Eastward of the present city, amongst the mounds and ruins 
of the old town, in a dilapidated chamber adjoining a blue- 
domed building over the grave of an imamzadeh, is the tomb 
of the astronomer-poet Omar Khayyam, an unsightly heap of 
plaster without inscription, and probably fictitious. Near it is 
the grave of the celebrated poet and mystic Farid ud din Attar, 
who was killed by the Mongols when they captured the city 
c. 1229. 

Nishapur was an important place during the 5th century, for 
Yazdegerd II. (438-457) mostly resided there. During the latter 
Sassanids it is seldom mentioned, and when the Arabs came to 
Khorasan (641-642) it was of so little importance that, as 
Tabari relates, it did not even have a garrison. Under the 
Tahirids (820-872) it became a flourishing town and rose to 
great importance during the Samanids (874-999). Toghrul, the 
first ruler of the Seljuk dynasty, made Nishapur his residence 
in 1037. In 1153 the Ghuzz Turkomans overran the country 
and partly destroyed town and suburbs. In 1208 most of the 
town was destroyed by an earthquake. The town was hardly 
rebuilt when it was again destroyed, this time by the Mongols 
(April 1 221) and so effectually that, completely levelled to the 
ground, it was turned into a vast barley field. The city was again 
rebuilt, suffered again at the hands of the Mongols (1269) and 
from another great earthquake (1280), and never again rose to 
its former greatness. (A. H.-S.) 


NISIBIS (Nasibina in the Assyrian inscriptions), an ancient 
city and fortress in the north of Mesopotamia, near the point 
where the Mygdonius (mod. Jaghjagha) leaves the mountains 
by a narrow defile. The modern Nezib or Nasibin consists of 
some 4000 inhabitants, largely Jews, who pay tribute to the 
Shammar Bedouins. The neighbourhood, we are informed by 
Arab writers, was at one time richly wooded, but is now somewhat 
marshy and unhealthy. According to the Arabian geographer, 
Yaqut, Persian scorpions were thrown into the place when it was' 
besieged by Anushirwan; hence their number to-day. The 
church of St James, belonging to a small community of Jacobite 
Christians, and a few pillars and blocks of masonry are the only 
remains of the former greatness of the town. 

The site of Nisibis, on the great road between the Tigris and the 
Mediterranean, and commanding alike the mountain country to the 
north and the then fertile plain to the south, gave it an importance 
which began during the Assyrian period and continued under the 
Seleucid empire. From 149 B.C. to a.d. 14 Nisibis was the residence 
of the kings of Armenia, and there Tigranes had his treasure-houses. 
The place figured frequently as a frontier fortress in the wars of the 
Romans and the Parthians, its brick walls being unusually thick 
and its citadel very strong. Ceded to the Parthians by Hadrian, 
it became a Roman colony (Septimia' Colonia Nisibis) under 
Septimius Severus. It was heroically defended against Shapur 
(Sapor) II., who unsuccessfully besieged it thrice. In the peace made 
by Jovian, however, it passed into the hands of the Persians, who 
established a strong colony there (a.d. 364). Nisibis early became 
the seat of a Jacobite bishop and of a Nestorian metropolitan, and 
under the Arabs (when it continued to flourish and became the centre 
of the district of Diya'r Rebi*a) the population of the town and 
neighbourhood was still mostly Christian, and included numerous 
monasteries. Arab geographers and travellers of the middle ages 
speak in high terms of the gardens of Nisibis, and the magnificent 
returns obtained by the agriculturist. According to Mokaddasi (o&. 
1024), acorns, preserved fruits and manufactured articles such as 
carnages and inkstands were exported. The town was so heavily 
taxed by the Hamdanid princes at Mosul that the Arab tribe of the 
Banu Hablb, although blood relations of the Hamdanids, migrated 
into Byzantine territory, where they were well received, accepted 
Christianity, attracted other emigrants from Nisibis, and at last began 
to avenge themselves by yearly raids upon their old home. Ibn 
IJaukal goes on to say that finally the Hamdanids took possession 
of the town, confiscated the estates of those who had emigrated, and 
compelled those who remained to substitute corn for their profitable 
fruit crops. This destroyed the prosperity of Nisibis, and the dis- 
trict, no longer protected against nomad tribes, became a wilderness. 
Nisibis (Nezib) appeared for the last time in history in 1839, when 
the Egyptians under Ibrahim Pasha defeated the Turkish army 
under Hafiz Pasha on the 24th of June in a battle at which von 
Moltke was present. 


NISI PRIUS, in English law, a term used to denote generally 
all actions tried before judges of the king's bench division. 
For the history and meaning of this term see Assize. As a rule 
actions only are tried at nisi prius, and a judge is said to sit at 
nisi prius when he sits, usually in the king's bench division, for 
the trial of actions. By a resolution passed by the judges of the 
king's bench division in 1894 it was declared of the utmost 
importance that there should be at least three courts of nisi prius 
sitting continuously throughout the legal year — one for special 
jury causes, one for common jury causes, and one for causes with- 
out juries (see the Annual Practice). 

Nisi Prius Record was before the Judicature Acts the name of the 
formal copy of proceedings showing the history of the ease up to the 
time of trial. After the trial it was endorsed with the postea, show- 
ing the result of the trial, and delivered by the officer of the court 
to the successful party, whose possession of the postea was his title 
to judgment. Since the Judicature Acts there is no nisi prius record 
in civil actions, the nearest approach to it being the deposit of 
copies of the' pleadings for the use. of the judge, and there is no 
postea t the certificate of the associate or master as to the result of 
the trial superseding it. 


NISUS, in Greek mythology, king of Megara, brother of Aegeus, 
king of Athens. When Minos, king of Crete, was on his way to 
attack Athens to avenge the murder of his son Androgeus, for 
which Aegeus was directly or indirectly responsible, he laid siege 
to Megara. He finally gained possession of the city through the 
treachery of the king's daughter Scylla, who, enamoured of 
Minos, pulled out the golden (or purple) lock from her father's 
head, on which his life and the safety of the city depended (for 
similar stories, see Frazer, Golden Bough, iii. 1000, p. 358). 
Megara was captured, and Nisus, who died fighting (or slew 
himself), was changed into a sea-eagle. Minos, disgusted at 
ScyhVs treachery, tied her to the rudder of his ship, and after- 
wards cast her body ashore on the promontory called after her 
Scyllaeum; or she threw herself into the sea and swam after 
Minos, constantly pursued by her father, until* at last she was 
changed into a ciris (a bird or a fish). In Virgil, Scylla, the 
daughter of Nisus, is confused with the sea-monster, the daughter 
of Phorcys. Nisus was the eponymous hero of the harbour of 
Nisaea, and local tradition makes no mention of his betrayal by 
his daughter. According to Roscher (in his Lexikon der Mytho- 
logie), who identifies the ciris with the heron, the story of Nisus 
and Scylla (like these of Aedon, Procne, Philomela and Tereus) 
was invented to give an aetiological explanation of the char- 
acteristics of certain birds. The birds were regarded as originally 
human beings, whose acts and characters were supposed to 
account for certain habits of the birds into which they had been 
changed. E. Siecke, De Niso et Scylla in aves mutatis (progr. 
Berlin, 1884), holds that the purple or golden hair of Nisus is the 
sun, and Scylla the moon, and that the origin of the legend is to be 
looked for in a very ancient myth of the relations between the two, 
which he endeavours to explain with the aid of Indian and 
German parallels. 


NITHARD (d. 844), Frankish historian, was the illegitimate 
son of Angilbert, the friend of Charlemagne, by Bertha, a 
daughter of the great emperor. He was educated at the imperial 
court and became abbot of St Riquier in commendam, never taking 
the vows. Little else is known about his life, but he appears 
to have served his cousin, Charles the Bald, on peaceful errands 
and also on the field of battle. He fought for Charles at.Fontenoy 
in June 841, and died as the result of wounds received whilst 
fighting for him against the Northmen near Angouleme. The 
date of his death was probably the 14th of June 844. In the 
nth century his body, with the fatal wound still visible, was 
found in the grave of his father, Angilbert. Nithard's historical 
work consists of four books on the history of the Carolingian 
empire under the turbulent sons of the emperor Louis I., especi- 
ally during the troubled period between 840 and 843. This 
Historiae or De dissensionibus filiorum Ludovici pii is valuable 
for the light which it throws upon the causes which led to the 
disintegration of the Carolingian empire. Although rough in 
style, partisan in character and sometimes incorrect in detail, 
the books are the work of a man who had an intimate knowledge 
of the events which he relates, who possessed a clear and virile 
mind, and who above all was not a recluse but a man of action. 
They are dedicated to Charles the Bald, at whose request they 
were written. 

The Historiae has been printed several times. Perhaps the best 
edition is in Band ii. of the Monumenta Gertnaniae historica. Scrip- 
tores; it has also been edited by A. Holder (Freiburg, 1882). It 
has been translated into German by J. von Jasmund (Berlin, 1851 ; 
new edition by W. Wattenbach, Leipzig, 1889); and into French 
in tome iii. of Guizot's Collection des mimoires (Paris, 1824). 

See O. Kuntzemuller, Nithard und sein Geschichtswerk (Jena, 
1873); G. Meyer von Knonau, Ober Nithards vier Bucher Geschtchten 
(Leipzig, 1866); and W. Wattenbach, Deutschlands Geschichtsquellen t 
Band i. (Berlin, 1904). 


NITHSDALE, WILLIAM MAXWELL, sth Earl of (1676- 
1744), Jacobite leader, was a member of the family of Maxwell 
(q.v.), being a son of Robert the 4th earl (d. 1696) and a collateral 
relation of Robert Maxwell (d. 1646) who was created earl of 
Nithsdale in 1620. He became famous by his loyalty to the 
royalist tradition of his family, and by the heroism of his wife 
Winifred, daughter of William Herbert, 1st marquess of Powis. 
After becoming earl in 1698 he served the exiled house of Stuart 
in secret, was suspected as a Jacobite conspirator, and was much 
molested on that account. In 171 2 he resigned his estate to his 
son William (d. 1776), reserving a life rent to himself. When the 
Jacobite rising took place in 1715 he joined his friends in the 
north of England and was taken prisoner at Preston, being sent 
to London for trial. The countess of Nithsdale, who was at 
Terregles when she heard of the capture of her husband, followed 
him to London, making part of the journey on horseback in bitter 
winter weather. The earl and the other Jacobites were brought 
to trial in Westminster Hall on the 19th of January 1716, and 
condemned to death on the 9th'of February. The execution was 
fixed for the 24th. The countess presented a petition to George I. 
which he refused to receive, and when she knelt before him and 
took hold of the skirts of his coat he dragged her half across 
the room before he could break away. Finding that no pardon 
could be obtained the countess laid a plan to rescue her husband 
from the Tower of London. With the help of two Jacobite 
ladies, Mrs Morgan and Mrs Mills, she very cleverly extricated 
her husband from his cell on the night before the day fixed for 
the execution by disguising him as a woman. The earl escaped 
from England and was followed by the countess, but not till 
she had gone back to Scotland to rescue important legal papers 
which proved the transfer of the estate to their son. The earl 
and countess went to Rome after a short stay in France. In 
Rome they were attached to the court of the Pretender and lived 
in poverty and obscurity. The earl died on the 20th of March 
1744, and the countess in 1749. Their son, William Maxwell, 
regained the possession of the family property after his father's 
death in 1744, since the government could only confiscate his 
father's life-interest; but the title was forfeited, and he died 
childless. 
See Sir A. Fraser, The Book of Carlaverock (Edinburgh, 1873). 


NITRE, the name given to naturally occurring potassium 
nitrate; " cubic nitre " is sodium nitrate. The word is adapted 
from Lat. nitrum, which is itself adapted from Gr. vlrpov. These 
words were originally applied to the naturally occurring sodium 
carbonate; the connexion with potassium nitrate {sal petrae 
or sal petrosum) may be traced to Raimon Lull's name sal nitri, 
which substance, however, he distinguished from nitrum. In 
the 16th century the ancient nitrum became altered tq natron, 
a term still used for native sodium carbonate, while nitrum, and 
its adaptation nitre, were retained for potassium nitrate or salt- 
petre (q.v.). 


NITRIC ACID (aqua fortis), HNO3, an important mineral acid. 
It is mentioned in the De inventione veritatis ascribed to Geber, 
wherein it is obtained by calcining a mixture of nitre, alum and 
blue vitriol. It was again described by Albert le Grand in the 
13th century and by Raimon Lull, who prepared it by heating 
nitre and clay and called it " eau forte." Glauber devised the 
process in common use to-day, viz. by heating nitre with strong 
sulphuric acid. Its true nature was not determined until the 
18th century, when A. L. Lavoisier (1776) showed that it con- 
tained oxygen, whilst in 1785 H. Cavendish determined its 
constitution and showed that it could be synthesized by passing 
a stream of electric sparks through moist air. The acid is found 
to exist to a slight extent in the free condition in some waters, 
but chiefly occurs in combination with various metals, as nitrates, 
principally as nitre or saltpetre, KNO3, and Chile saltpetre, 
NaNC>3. It is formed when a stream of electric sparks is passed 
through moist air, and in the oxidation of nitrogenous matter 
in the presence of water. 

For experimental purposes it is usually obtained by distilling 
potassium or sodium nitrate with concentrated sulphuric acid. 
The acid so obtained usually contains more or less water and 
some dissolved nitrogen peroxide which gives it a yellowish red 
colour. It may be purified by redistillation over barium and 
silver nitrates, followed by treatment of the distillate with a 
stream of ozonized air. The product so obtained is then redistilled 
under diminished pressure and finally distilled again from a sealed 
and evacuated apparatus (V. Veley and Manley, Phil. Trans., 
1898, A. 291, p. 365). On the large scale it is obtained by distil- 
ling Chile saltpetre with concentrated sulphuric acid in horizontal 
cast iron stills, the vapours being condensed in a series of 
stoneware Woulfe's bottles. In practice the theoretical quantity 
of acid and Chile saltpetre is not used, but the charge is so 
regulated that the mixture of acid and neutral sodium sulphate 
formed in the retort remains liquid at the temperature employed, 
and consequently can be readily removed. Various modifica- 
tions have been made in the form of the condensing apparatus, the 
Guttmann condenser {Jour. Soc. diem. Ind., 1893, p. 203) being 
now frequently employed. This consists of a series of vertical 
earthenware condensing tubes through which compressed air is 
passed in order to reduce the quantity of nitrogen peroxide to 
a minimum. The temperature of the condenser is so regulated 
as to bring about the condensation of the nitric acid only, which 
runs out at the bottom of the pipe, whilst any uncondensed 
steam, nitrogen peroxide and other impurities pass into a Lunge 
tower, where they meet a descending stream of water and are 
condensed, giving rise to an impure acid. F. Valentiner [Eng. 
Pat. 610 (1892), 19192 (1895)] recommends distillation and 
condensation of nitric acid in a partial vacuum. For the 
production of nitric acid from air see Nitrogen. Fuming nitric 
acid consists of a solution of nitrogen peroxide in concentrated 
nitric acid and is prepared by distilling dry sodium nitrate with 
concentrated sulphuric acid. 

Nitric acid is a colourless strongly fuming liquid, having a 
specific gravity of 1-50394 (24-2° C.) (V. Veley, Proc. Roy. Soc, 62, 
p. 223). It is exceedingly hygroscopic and corrosive. On dis- 
tillation, the pure acid begins to boil at 78-2° C. (W. Ramsay), 
partial decomposition into water, oxygen and nitrogen peroxide 
taking place. The acid solidifies when strongly cooled, the solid 
melting at-47 C. Concentrated nitric acid forms with water a 
constant boiling mixture which boils at 120*5° C., contains 68% 
of acid and possesses a specific gravity of 1*414 (15*5° C). If 
a more dilute acid than this be distilled, water passes over in 
excess and the residue in the retort reaches the above composition 
and boiling point; on distillation of a stronger acid, excess of 
acid passes into the distillate and the boiling point rises until the 
values of the constant boiling mixture are reached. On the 
hydrates of nitric acid see V. Veley, Jour. Client. Soc, 1903, 83, 
p. 1015, and F. W. Kuster, Zeit. anorg. Chem. 1904, 41, p. 1. On 
mixing nitric acid with water there is a rise of temperature and 
a contraction in volume. The acid is a powerful oxidizing agent. 
It attacks most metals readily, usually with production of a 
nitrate or hydrated oxide of the metal and one or other of the 
oxides of nitrogen, or occasionally with the production of 
ammonium salts; magnesium, however, liberates hydrogen from 
the very dilute acid. Its action on metals depends in most cases 
on the temperature, strength of the acid, and the nature of the 
products of reaction. Thus in the case of copper, it is found that 
the diluted acid acts very slowly upon the metal at first, but as the 
reaction proceeds the copper dissolves more rapidly up to a 
certain point and then the rate of solution again diminishes. 
This is possibly due to the accelerating action of the nitrous acid 
which is produced in the direct action of the copper on the nitric 
acid and which, when a certain amount has been formed in 
the system, begins to decompose, thus 3HN02=HN03+ 
2NO+H2O (V. Veley, Phil. Trans., 1891, 182, p. 279; G. O. 
Higley, Amer. Chem. Jour., 1893, 15, p. 71, 1895, 17, p. 18, 
1896, 1 8, p. 587). Iron when brought into contact with nitric 
acid under certain conditions, remains passive to the acid. 
Thus at 55° C. it is passive to an acid of specific gravity 1*42, 
and at 31° C. to an acid of specific gravity 1-38. No satis- 
factory explanation of this passivity has been given (see J. B. 
Senderens, Bull. Soc. Chem., 1896 [3], 15, p. 691; A. Finkelstein, 
Zeit. phys. Chem., 1901, 39, p. 91; W. J. Muller, ibid. 1904, 
48, p. 577). Nitric acid is without action on gold, platinum, 
iridium and rhodium. 

The salts of nitric acid, known as nitrates, are mostly readily 
soluble in water and crystallize well. They are all decomposed when 
heated to a sufficiently high temperature, with evolution for the most 
part of oxygen and nitrogen peroxide, leaving a residue of oxide 
of the metal. They may be recognized by the fact that on the 
addition of a solution of ferrous sulphate, followed by that of con- 
centrated sulphuric acid (the mixture being kept quite cold), the 
ferrous sulphate solution becomes of a deep brown colour, owing 
to the reducing action of the ferrous sulphate on the nitric acid 
which is liberated by the action of the sulphuric acid on the nitrate. 
As an alternative method the nitrate may be warmed with some 
fragments of copper and sulphuric acid which has been diluted with 
its own volume of water, when characteristic brown vapours will be 
seen. 

Nitric acid finds extensive application in the manufacture of 
sulphuric acid, certain coal-tar colouring matters, explosives, and in 
the production of various nitrates. 

In medicine, nitric acid is used externally in a pure state as a 
caustic to destroy chancres, warts and phagadenic ulcers; and diluted 
preparations are employed in the treatment of dyspepsia, &c. 
Poisoning by strong nitric acid produces a widespread gastro- 
enteritis, burning pain in the oesophagus and abdomen and bloody 
diarrhoea. There may also be blood in the urine. Death occurs 
from collapse or from secondary destructive changes in the intestinal 
canal. Characteristic yellow staining of the skin round the mouth 
from the formation of xanthoproteic acid serves to distinguish it 
from poisoning by other acids. The antidotes are mild alkalis, 
together with the use of opium to relieve pain. 


NITROBENZENE, C 6 H 5 N0 2 , the simplest aromatic nitro 
compound. It was first isolated in 1834 by E. Mitscherlich 
(Pogg. Ann., 1834, 31, p. 625), and is prepared commercially 
by the gradual addition of benzene to a well-cooled mixture of 
concentrated nitric and sulphuric acids, the oily product being 
separated, washed with alkali, and then distilled. It also results 
in the oxidation of aniline by monopersulphuric acid (H. Caro, 
Zeit. angew. Chem., 1898, p. 845) or by potassium permanganate 
(E. Bamberger, Ber., 1893. 26, p. 496); by the oxidation of 
nitrosobenzene (below) with atmospheric oxygen; or by the 
decomposition of benzene diazonium nitrate mercury nitrite, 
Hg(N0 2 )2-2C6H5N 2 -N03, with copper powder (A. Hantzsch, 
Ber., 1900, 33, p. 2551). It is a yellowish liquid possessing a 
strong smell of oil of bitter almcnds. It boils at 209°C., and melts 
at 3*6° C. (C.E. Linebarger, Amer. Chem. Jour., 1896, 18, p. 437). 
The products of its electrolytic reduction vary with the con- 
ditions: in sulphuric acid solution it yields para-aminophenol 
(L. Gattermann, Ber., 1893, 26, p. 1844); in alcoholic alkaline 
solution it yields azoxybenzene; in acid alcoholic solution, 
benzidine; in ammoniacal alcoholic solution, phenylhydrazine. 
With chlorine, in the presence of iodine or antimony chloride, it 
yields meta-chlornitrobenzene. Hydrobromic acid at 1 85°-i 9o°C. 
converts it into di- and tri-bromaniline. It occasionally acts as 
an oxidizing agent, as in the preparation of quinoline and f uchsine. 
It is used commercially for the preparation of aniline and of 
benzidine; and in perfumery (oil of mirbane). 

Dinitrobenzenes, QH^NOsV— Ortho-dinitrobenzene is formed in 
small quantity in the preparation of meta-dinitrobenzene, and also 
results from the action of nitro-sulphuric acid on bismuth triphenyl 
(A. Gillmeister, Ber., 1897, 30, p. 2844). It forms colourless crystals 
which melt at 116*5° C. and boil at 319° C. (773 mm.). On boiling 
with aqueous caustic soda, it yields ortho-nitrophenol. Meta-dinitro- 
benzene is formed by the direct nitration of t nitrobenzene with 
fuming nitric acid, the product being poured into water and re- 
crystallized from dilute alcohol. It forms practically colourless 
needles which melt at 89*7° C, and boil at 302-8° C. Jt is used for 
the preparation of meta-phenylene diamine. Para-dinitrobenzene 
results from the action of nitrogen peroxide on an ethereal solution 
of quinone dioxime (R. Oliveri-Tortorici, Gazz., 1900, 30, i. p. 533). 
It crystallizes in colourless needles, which melt at 171 -172 C. It 
is only slightly soluble in cold water and cold alcohol. 

Trtnitrobenzenes, QH^NO^s. — Asymmetrical (1 .2.4) trinitro- 
benzene results from the action of fuming nitric and sulphuric acids 
on para-dinitrobenzene. It forms yellow crystals, which melt at 
57*5° C. When boiled with dilute aqueous caustic soda it yields 
2*4 dinitrophenol. Symmetrical (1.3.5) trinitrobenzeneis formed by 
the further nitration of meta-dinitrobenzene with fuming sulphuric 
and nitric acids; by the action of hydrochloric acid on sodium 
malonyl aldehyde (H. B. Hill and J. Torray, Ber., 1895, 28, p. 2598), 
or by the action of water on 2.4.6-trinitrobenzoic acid (German 
patent 77353). It crystallizes in prisms which melt at 12 1° C. 
It yields addition compounds, with aniline and naphthalene, and 
combines directly with potassium methylate, sodio-malonic^ ester 
and hydrocyanic ester. Alkaline potassium ferricyanide oxidizes it 
to picric acid. 

Nitrosobenzene, C5H5NO, was first obtained by the action of nitrosyl 
bromide or chloride on mercury diphenyl (A. Baeyer, Ber., 1874, 7, 
p. 1638). It results, with other products, in the oxidation of phenyl 
diazonium chloride with alkaline potassium ferricyanide; of P- 
phenylhydroxylamine with chromic acid mixture (E. Bamberger, 
Ber., 1893, 26, pp. 473, 483, 1894, 27, p. I349)» or of aniline by 
monopersulphuric acid (German patent 1 10575). It exists in two 
crystalline forms. Nitric acid passed into its chloroform solution 
gives phenyl diazonium nitrate. With aniline and acetic acid it 
yields azobenzene. It combines with aromatic amines to form azo- 
compounds, with aryjhydroxylamines to form .azoxy compounds, 
and with hydroxylamine it gives isodiazobenzene. 


NITRO COMPOUNDS, in organic chemistry, compounds 
containing the monovalent radical -NO2 directly combined 
with carbon. 

Aiphatic Nitro Compounds. — The nitroparaffins may be 
obtained by the action of the alkyl iodides on silver nitrite 
(V. Meyer, Ann. 1874, 171, p. 1 et seq.). When methyl iodide 
is used, nitromethane is the sole product, but the higher homo- 
logues give more or less of the isomeric nitrous esters. Nitro- 
paraffins may also be obtained by the action of sodium nitrite on 
the a-halogen fatty acids, the a-nitro fatty acids first formed 
readily eliminating carbon dioxide (H. TLolht, J our. prak. Chem., 
1872 [2] s, p. 427). Tertiary nitro compounds may also be 
obtained by the oxidation of the corresponding amino-, hydroxyl- 
amino-, and nitroso-hydrocarbons with monopersulphuric acid 
(E. Bamberger, Ber., 1903, 36, p. 385): 

}C-NH 2 -> ^C-NHOH-^ }C-NOH> ^ON0 2 . 
The nitro compounds of the lower members of the paraffin series 
cannot be prepared by the direct action of nitric acid on the 
hydrocarbons themselves, but, in the case of some of the higher 
members of the series direct nitration is possihle (M. Konowalow, 
Comptes rendus, 1892, 114, p. 26; Ber., 1895, 28, p. 1852; R. A. 
Worstall, Amer. Chem. Jour., 1898, 20, p. 202). 

The nitro compounds are colourless, somewhat pleasant smell-, 
ing liquids, which distil without decomposition and possess 
boiling points much higher than those of the isomeric nitrous 
esters. Reduction with acid-reducing agents gives amines. 
The primary and secondary nitro compounds {i.e. those con- 
taining the groupings -CHjNOj and >CH-NC>2) form metallic 
derivatives; for example, sodium salts, which according to A. 
Hantzsch (Ber., 1899, 32, pp. 577 et seq.) are probably derived 
from the isomeric iso-nitro compounds R : NO(OH), and thus 
the nitro derivatives are to be looked upon as pseudo-acids. 
These sodium salts are crystalline solids which are readily soluble 
in water and are very explosive. Stannous chloride and hydro- 
chloric acid reduce the nitroparaffins to /8-alkyl hydroxylamines, 
amines and some ammonia being simultaneously produced (V. 
Meyer, Ber., 1891, 24, p. 3530), whilst the primary nitro com- 
pounds on heating with hydrochloric acid yield hydroxylamine 
and an acid: 

CH r CH 2 .N0 2 -r-H 2 = CH,.C0 2 H-i-NH 2 OH 
(V. Meyer, Ann., 1876, 180, p. 163). When reduced. by the 
Sabatier and Senderens* method (Comptes rendus, 1902, 135, 
p. 225) they are converted into amines, provided the temperature 
be kept at i$o -2oo° C, a higher temperature leading to the 
formation of paraffins and ammonia. The hydrogen in the 
primary and secondary nitro compounds which is attached to 
the same carbon atom as the nitro group is readily replaced by 
bromine in alkaline solution. The reactions of the nitroparaffins 
with nitrous acid are very characteristic and have been used as a 
method for discriminating * between the primary, secondary 
and tertiary alcohols (q.v.) (V, Meyer, Ann., 1875, 175, p. 93). 
The primary compounds form niirolic acids of the type 
R-C(:NOH)NO, the secondary yield pseudo-nitrols of the type 
RR ! :C(NO)(N02), whilst the tertiary nitro compounds are not 
acted upon by nitrous acid. The primary nitroparaffins combine 
with nitric oxide in the presence of sodium ethylate, to form 
nitroalkylisonitramines, R*CH(NC>2)*N202H (W. Traube, Ann., 
1898, 300, p. 95). 

Nitromethane, CHjNOj, is a colourless oil which boils at 101 C. 
Fuming sulphuric acid decomposes it into carbon monoxide and 
hydroxylamine. It combines with aromatic aldehydes in the pres- 
ence of alcoholic potash to form addition products which are con- 
verted by acids into styrol derivatives (J. Thiele, Ber., 1899, 32, 
p. 1293). Nitroethane, CiHsN02, is a colourless liquid which boils 
at 114 C. Nitroform (trinitromethane), CH(NOj)j, is obtained in 
the form of its ammonium salt by the decomposition of trinitro- 
acetonitrile with water (L. Schischkoff, Ann., 1857, 103, p. 364). 
It is a colourless crystalline solid which melts at 13 C. and has the 
properties of a strong acid. The potassium salt is formed by the 
action of potassium ethylate on tetranitromethane (A. Hantzsch, 
Ber., 1899, 32, p. 631). It is a deep yellow coloured solid, which 
is readily soluble in water. It explodes when heated. The silver salt, 
obtained by shaking an ether solution of nitroform with freshly 
prepared, slightly moist silver oxide, reacts with methyl iodide to 
form trinitroethane, a crystalline solid which melts at 56 C. Concen- 
trated caustic potash decomposes the latter compound, forming the 
potassium salt of dinitroethane, CHrC(NOj)jK. Tetranitromethane t 
C(NOj)4, obtained by adding nitroform to a hot mixture of nitric 
and sulphuric acids, is a crystalline solid which melts at 13 C. 
Chlor pterin, CClsN<X is a liquid of suffocating odour obtained by 
the action of nitric acid and chloride of lime on many organic com- 
pounds. It boils at 112 . 

Aromatic Nitro Compounds. — The aromatic nitro compounds 
are generally obtained by the direct action of nitric acid. 
Substitution takes place usually in the nucleus and only 
rarely in the side chain, and according to the conditions of 
the experiment and the nature of the compound acted upon, one 
or more nitro groups enter the molecule. The reaction is gener- 
ally carried out in the presence of sulphuric acid, which is used to 
absorb the water formed during the process of nitration. Nitro 
compounds have also been prepared by the action of cuprous 
oxide on diazonium salts (T. Sandmeyer, Ber., 1887, 20, p. 1494) ; 
by the action of copper powder on the double salt formed 
by the addition of potassium mercuric nitrite to diazonium 
nitrites; and by the oxidation of primary aromatic amines (E. 
Bamberger, Ber., 1893, 26, p. 496). The mono-nitro compounds 
are stable and distil without decomposition; they have a pale 
yellow colour and possess an agreeable odour. Most of the poly- 
nitro compounds are not volatile, but undergo decomposition 
on heating. The nitro group in the aromatic series is bound very 
firmly in the molecule and is not readily exchanged for other 
groups. Several different products may be obtained by the 
reduction of the aromatic nitro compounds, the substances 
formed in any particular case depending on the conditions of 
experiment. In acid solution, amines are obtained, in alkaline 
solution, azoxy, azo and hydrazo compounds, and in neutral 
solution hydroxylamino compounds. The electrolytic reduction 
of the aromatic nitro compounds gives rise to substituted 
hydroxylamines which are immediately transformed into 
aminophenols or amines. 

For the nitrobenzenes see Nitrobenzene. Nitroioluenes, 
CbH4(CH)j(NO)j. Three isomers exist, the ortho- and para-com- 
pounds being the chief products of the direct nitration of toluene. 
They may be separated by fractional distillation. The ortho- 
compound melts at 10-5° C. and boils at 218 C, the para-compound 
melts at 54 C. and boils at 230 C. Meta-nitrotoluene (melting at 
1 6° C.) is obtained by nitrating acetparatoluidide and then replacing 
the amino group by hydrogen. 

Phenylnitromethane, C 6 Hs'CH 2 *N02, isomeric with the nitro- 
toluenes, is prepared by the action of benzyl chloride on silver 
nitrite. It is a colourless oily liquid which boils at 225°-227° C, is. 
somewhat soluble in water, and does not give a coloration with ferric 
chloride. It readily forms a sodium salt, from the agueous solution 
of which on the addition of a mineral acid an isomeric solid form of 
the nitro compound (melting at 8^° C.) is precipitated. This solid 
form gradually passes, on standing, into the oily variety. It is probably 
a hydroxy-compound, since it gives a red-brown colour with ferric 
chloride, reacts with phenyl isocyanate and with phosphorus penta- 
chloride, and with benzoyl chloride yields dibenzhydroxamic acid, 
CcHsCONH-O-COCbH*. Thus the solid form is probably to be 
represented as CcHsCH: NO-OH or C 6 H 6 -CH<£ (see further, 

A. Hantzsch on Pseudo-acids, Ber., 1899, 32, p. 575, 1902, 35, pp. 
210, 226, 1001, 1906, 39, pp. 139, 1073 et seq.). 

The nitrolic acids, R-C(:N0H)NC>2, may be prepared by the 
action of nitrous acid on the primary nitroparaffins; by the 
action of hydroxylamine on the dibromnitroparaffins; and by 
the action of nitrogen peroxide on the a-isonitroso fatty acids 
(G. Ponzio, Gazz., 1903, ^ (1), p. 508). They are colourless solids 
which are readily soluble in water and possess the character of 
weak acids. They are characterized by the deep red colour of 
their solutions in alkalis. When strongly heated they decom- 
pose, forming fatty acids, nitrogen peroxide and nitrogen. By 
passing hydrochloric acid gas into an ethereal solution of the 
acids, the nitro group is eliminated and the hydrochloride of an 
oximido-acid is obtained (A. Werner and H. Buss, Ber., 1895, 28, 
p.i282):CH J .C(:NOH)NO,+2HCl=HN0 2 +CHrC(:NOH)Cl-Ha. 

When heated with water and mineral acids, the nitrolic acids are 
completely decomposed, yielding fatty acids and nilrous oxide. 

A. Hantzsch and O. Graul (Ber. 1898, 31, p. 2854) described 
several series of salts of the nitrolic acids, with particular refer- 
ence to ethylnitrolic acid. They discriminate between the red 
or erythro-salts, which are well crystallized, very explosive and 
unstable compounds, and which regenerate the colourless 
nitrolic acid on the addition of dilute mineral acids, and the 
leuco-SdL\tSj which are colourless salts obtained by warming the 
erythro-salts or by exposing them to direct sunlight. These 
salts cannot be converted either into the red salts or into the free 
acid. An intensely yellow acid salt is described, as is also a very 
unstable colourless salt which could not be examined further 
owing to its very labile nature. The following structural formulae 
are assigned to these compounds: — 

	?N-OH 
	RC <NO, 
	nitrolic acid; 
	R-C<: 
	N(OK) 
	>o 
	R . C< £0 2 K 
	*N(:0) 
	erythro-salt ; leuco-salt. 

The acid salts are obtained by the addition of one molecule 
of alkali to two molecules of the acid in concentrated alcoholic 
solution at a low temperature. They are unstable compounds 
which readily split into the red salt and the free acid on standing. 

The pseudo-nitrols, RR':C(NO)(N0 2 ), may be obtained by the 
action of nitrous acid on the secondary nitroparamns; by the 
action of silver nitrite on such bromnitrosoparaffins as contain 
the bromine and the nitroso group united to the same carbon 
atom (0. Piloty, Ber., 1002, 35, p. 3093); and by the action of 
nitrogen peroxide on ethereal solutions of ketoximes (R. Scholl, 
Ber., 1888, 21, p. 508; G. Born, Ber. 1896, 29, p. 93). They 
exhibit an intense blue colour when in the liquid condition or 
dissolved in alkali and possess a very sharp smell. On oxidation 
with chromic acid they yield dinitrohydrocarbons, and on 
reduction with hydroxylamine (in alkaline solution) or with 
potassium sulphydrate give ketoximes, RR':C:NOH (R. Scholl 
and K. Landsteiner, Ber., 1896, 29, p. 87). 
RR'tCCNOJ-NC^-^RR'iqNH-OHJj-^RR'iCiN-OH+NHaOH. 

Nitrosohydrocarbons have been prepared in the aliphatic series 
by the oxidation of the corresponding hydroxylamino compounds. 
Nitroso-tertiary butane, (CHs^C-NO, is formed when the corre- 
sponding hydroxylamine is oxidized by sulphuric monoper acid 
(E. Bamberger, Ber., 1903, 36, p. 686). A nitrosooctane 
(CH^CCNOHCHslrCHCCHa^, has been obtained by O. Piloty 
and 0. Ruff {Ber., 1898, 31, p. 457) from nitro-di-isobutyl by 
reducing it to the corresponding hydroxylamino compound with 
aluminium amalgam and oxidizing this with chromic acid 
mixture. It is a colourless solid which melts at 54 C. to a deep 
blue liquid. Numerous nitroso compounds are met with in the 
aromatic series. 


NITROGEN [symbol N., atomic weight 14-01, = i6]. A 
non-metallic chemical element, first isolated in 1772 by D. 
Rutherford, who showed that on removing oxygen from air 
a gas remained, which was incapable of supporting combustion 
or respiration. Nitrogen forms approximately 79% by volume 
(or 77% by weight) of the atmosphere; actual values are: 
% by volume — 79-07 (Regnault), 79-20 (Dumas); % by weight — 
76-87 (Regnault), 77-00 (Dumas), 77-002 (L6wy), 76-900 (Stas), 
77-010 (Marignac). No absolutely accurate determinations 
appear to have been made recently. Free nitrogen is also 
found in some natural waters and has been recognized in certain 
nebulae. In the combined state nitrogen is fairly widely dis- 
tributed, being found in nitre, Chile saltpetre, ammonium salts 
and in various animal and vegetable tissues and liquids. It is 
invariably present in soils, where compounds are formed by 
nitrifying bacteria. 

Nitrogen may be obtained from the atmosphere by the removal 
of the oxygen with which it is there mixed. This may be effected 
by burning phosphorus in a confined volume of air, by the action 
of an alkaline solution of pyrogallol on air, by passing air over 
heated copper, or by the action of copper on air in the presence 
of ammoniacal solutions. 

It is also prepared by heating ammonium nitrite (or a mixture 
of sodium nitrite and ammonium chloride): NH 4 NO f =2H,0+N S ; 
by heating a mixture of ammonium nitrate and chloride (the chlorine 
which is simultaneously produced being absorbed by milk of lime or 
by a solution of sodium hydroxide): 4NH 4 N03+2NH<Cl=5Ni 
+Clj-f*12HjO; by heating ammonium dichromate (or a mixture 
of ammonium chloride and potassium dichromate): (NHOjCrjOz 
= Cr 3 Oi+4HtO+N»; by passing chlorine into a concentrated solution 
of ammonia (which should be present in considerable excess): 
8NH|+3C1,=6NH4C1-|-N,; by the action of hypochlorites or hypo- 
bromites on ammonia: 3NaOBr+2NH|=3NaBr-f3H,0-f;Ni; and 
by the action of manganese dioxide on ammonium nitrate at 
180-200° C. It is also^ formed by the reduction of nitric and nitrous 
oxides with hydrogen in the presence of platinized asbestos at a red 
heat (G. v. Knorre and K. Arndt, Ber. t 1899, 32, p. 2136); by the 
oxidation of hydroxylamine (ibid,, 1900, 33, p. 30) ; and by the electro- 
lysis of hydrazine and its salts (E. Ch. Szarvasy, Jour. Chem. Soc. t 
1900, 77, p. 603). 

The chief importance of nitrogenous compounds depends 
upon their assimilation by living plants, which, in their develop- 
ment, absorb these compounds from the soil, wherein they are 
formed mainly by the action of nitrifying bacteria. Since these 
compounds are essential to plant life, it becomes necessary to 
replace the amount abstracted from the soil, and hence a demand 
for nitrogenous manures was created. This was met in a very 
large measure by deposits of natural nitre and the products 
of artificial nitrieres, whilst additional supplies are available in 
the ammoniacal liquors of the gas-manufacturer, &c. The 
possible failure of the nitre deposits led to attempts to convert 
atmospheric nitrogen into manures by processes permitting 
economic success. Combination can be made in five directions, 
viz. to form (1) oxides and nitric acids, (2) ammonia, (3) readily 
decomposable nitrides, (4) cyanides, (5) cyanamides. The first 
three will be treated here; for the others see Prussic Acid and 
Cyanamide. 

The combination of nitrogen with oxygen was first effected 
by Cavendish in 1785, who employed a spark discharge. The 
process was developed by Madame Lefebre in 1859; by Meissner 
in 1863, who found that moist gases gave a better result; and 
by Prim in 1882, who sparked the gases under pressure; it was 
also used by Lord Rayleigh in his isolation of argon (q.v.). It 
was not, however, a commercial success, and the same result 
attended Siemens and Halske's application of the silent discharge. 
More effective was the electric arc. In 1892 Sir W. Crookes 
showed that the arc brought about combination ; and in 1897 Lord 
Rayleigh went into the process more fully. But the first careful 
working-out of the conditions was made in 1000 by A. McDougall 
and F. Howies, who, employing a high tension alternating arc, 
showed that the effectiveness depended upon the temperature. 
The commercial manufacture of nitric acid was attempted by 
C. S. Bradley and D. R. Lovejoy at Niagara Falls, who passed 
atmospheric air, or air enriched with oxygen, about a high tension 
arc made as long as possible; but the company (the Atmospheric 
Products Company) was a failure. Better results have attended 
the process of K. Birkeland and S. Eyde, which is being worked 
on a large scale at Notodden, Norway. The arc is produced by 
leading a current* of about 5000 volts equatorially between the 
poles of an electromagnet; this produces what is practically a 
disk of flame, 6| ft. in diameter and having a temperature of 
about 3000 . The disk really consists of a series of successive 
arcs which increase in size until they burst. The first product of 
the reaction is nitric oxide, which on cooling with the residual 
gases produces nitrogen peroxide. The cooled gases are then 
led into towers where they meet a stream of water coming in the 
contrary direction. Nitric acid (up to 50%) is formed in the 
first tower, and weaker acids in the successive ones; the last 
tower contains milk of lime which combines with the gases to 
form calcium nitrite and nitrate (this product, being unsuitable 
as a manure, is decomposed with the acid, and the evolved gases 
sent back). It was found advantageous not to work for acid 
but for a basic Calcium nitrate (normal calcium nitrate being 
very deliquescent); for this purpose the acid is treated with 
the requisite amount of milk of lime. In the process of the 
Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik, the arc, which is said to be 
30 to 50 ft. long or more, is formed in a long tube, and the gases 
are sent round the arc by obliquely injecting them. A 30% 
acid is said to be formed. I. Moscicki and J. von Kowalski have 
patented a process wherein the arc is formed at two vertical 
concentric copper electrodes and rotated by an electromagnet; 
it is worked at Vevey, Switzerland. The Rankin process, of 
which very little is known, produces the arc with much lower 
current. 

The conversion of nitrogen into ammonia by electricity has 
received much attention, but the commercial aspect appears to 
have been first worked out by de Hemptinne in 1900, who used 
both the spark and silent discharge on mixtures of hydrogen and 
nitrogen, and found that the pressure and temperature must be 
kept low and the spark gap narrow. J. Schlutius in 1903 em- 
ployed Dowson gas as a source of hydrogen, and induced com- 
bination by means of platinum and the silent discharge. Several 
non-electrical processes have been devised. In 1862 Fleck passed 
a mixture of steam, nitrogen and carbon monoxide over red-hot 
lime, whilst in 1904 Woltereck induced combination by passing 
steam and air over red-hot iron oxide (peat is used in practice). 
In de Lambilly's process air and steam is led over white-hot 
coke, and carbon dioxide or monoxide removed from the escaping 
gases according as ammonium formate or carbonate is wanted. 
The residual gas is then passed through a tube containing porous 
materials, such as wood- or bone-charcoal, platinized pumice or 
spongy platinum, then mixed with steam and again forced 
through the tube. The reactions are represented as 

	(1) N 2 +3H 2 +2CO +2H 2 0=2H-C0 2 NH 4 (Ammcnium formate). 

	(2) N 2 +3H,+2C0 2 +2H 2 0=2HO-COjNH < (Ammoniumcarbonate). 

The best temperature for the first reaction is between 8o°C. and 
i3o°C. and for the second between 40 C. and 6o° C. In another 
process, which originated with C. Kaiser (Abst. /.C.S., 1907, 
ii. p. 862), calcium is heated in a current of hydrogen, and 
nitrogen passed over the hydride so formed ; this gives ammonia 
and calcium nitride, the latter of which gives up its nitrogen as 
ammonia and reforms the hydride when heated in a current of 
hydrogen. 

The fixation of nitrogen as a nitride has not been attended 
with commercial success. H. Mehner patented heating the 
oxides of silicon, boron or magnesium with coal or coke in an 
electric furnace, and then passing in nitrogen, which forms, with 
the metal liberated by the action of the carbon, a readily decom- 
posable nitride. 

For an extended bibliography see Bulletin No. 63 of the Bureau 
of Soils, U.S. Department of Agriculture (Washington, 1910). 

Nitrogen is a colourless, tasteless and odourless gas, which 
is only very slightly soluble in water. It is slightly lighter than 
air. Lord Rayleigh in 1894 found that the density of atmospheric 
nitrogen was about J % higher than that of chemically prepared 
nitrogen, a discovery which led to the isolation of the rare gases 
of the atmosphere (see Argon). The values obtained are shown 
below. 

Atmospheric Chemical 
Nitrogen. Nitrogen. 
0-97209 0-96727 Lord Rayleigh, Chem. News, 1897, 76, 
P- 315- 
0-9720 0-9671 A. Leduc, Comptes rendus, 1896, 123, 
p. 805. 

Nitrogen is a very inert gas: it will neither burn nor support 
the combustion of ordinary combustibles. It combines directly 
with lithium, calcium and magnesium when heated, whilst 
nitrides of the rare earth metals are also produced when their 
oxides are mixed with magnesium and heated in a current of 
nitrogen (C. Matignon, Comptes rendus, 1900, 131, p. 837). 
Nitrogen has been liquefied, the critical temperature being 
— 149 C. and the critical pressure 27-54 atmospheres. The 
liquefied gas boils at — 195*5° C., and its specific gravity at its 
boiling point is 0-8103 (E. C. C. Baly and F. G. Donnan, Jour, 
Chem. Soc, 1902, 81, p. 912). 

Compounds. 
m Nitrogen combines with hydrogen to form ammonia, NHj, hydra- 
zine, N 2 H 4 , and azoimide, N|H (qq.v.); the other known hydrides, 
N4H4 and N|Hs, are salts of azoimide, viz. NHrNj and NjHrNjH. 

Nitrogen trichloride, NC1 2 , discovered by P. L. Dulong in 181 1 
(Schweigg. Journ., 1811, 8, p. 302), and obtained by the action of 
chlorine or sodium hypochlorite on ammonium chloride, or by the 
electrolysis of ammonium chloride solution, is a very volatile yellow 
oil. It possesses an extremely pungent smell, and its vapour is 
extremely irritating to the eyes. It is a most dangerous explosive 
(see D. L. Chapman and L. Vodden, Jour. Chem. Soc, 1909, 95, 
p. 138). Chlorine azide, CbNi, was discovered by F. Raschig in 
iqo8 (see AzoiMinE); the corresponding iodine compound had been 
obtained in 1900 by A. Hantzsch (Ber., 33, p. 522). For the so-called 
nitrogen iodide see Ammonia. 

Nitrogen forms five oxides, viz. nitrous oxide, N 2 0, nitric oxide, 
NO, nitrogen trioxide, N 2 0«, nitrogen peroxide, N0 2 , and nitrogen 
pentoxide, N 2 0», whilst three oxyacids of nitrogen are known: 
hyponitrous acid, HjN 2 2 , nitrous acid, HNOj, and nitric acid, 
HNOt (q.v.). The first four oxides are gases, the fifth is a solid. 
Nitrous oxide, N 2 0, isolated in 1776^ by J. Priestley, who obtained 
it by reducing nitrogen peroxide with iron, may be prepared by 
heating ammonium nitrate at 1 70-260° C.,or by reducing a mixture 
of nitric and sulphuric acid with zinc. It is a colourless gas, which 
is practically odourless, but possesses a sweetish taste. It is some- 
what soluble in water. When liquefied it boils at -89-8° C, and by 
further coolmg may be solidified, the solid melting at -102-3° C. 
(W. Ramsay, Chem. News, 1803, 67, p. 140). It does not burn, 
but supports the combustion of heated substances almost as well as 
oxygen. It is used as an anaesthetic, principally in dentistry, 
producing when inhaled a condition of hysterical excitement often 
accompanied by loud laughter, whence it is sometimes called 
44 laughing gas. 

Nitric oxide, NO, first obtained by Van Helmont, is usually pre- 
pared by the action of dilute nitric acid (sp. gr. 1-2) on copper. 
This method does not give a pure gas, varying amounts of nitrous 
oxide and nitrogen being present (see Nitric Acid) In a purer con- 
dition it may be obtained by the action of sulphuric acid on a 
mixture of potassium nitrate and ferrous sulphate, or of hydrochloric 
acid on a mixture of potassium nitrate and ferric chloride. It is 
also formed by the action of concentrated sulphuric acid on sodium 
nitrite in the presence of mercury. It is a colourless gas which is 
only sparingly soluble in water. It may be liquefied, its critical 
temperature being -93*5°, and the liquid boils at -153-6° C. It 
is not a supporter- of combustion, unless the sustance introduced 
is at a sufficiently high temperature to decompose the gas, when 
combustion will continue at the expense of the liberated oxygen. 
If the gas be mixed with the vapour of carbon disulphide, the mixture 
burns with a vivid lavender-coloured flame Nitric oxide is soluble 
in solutions of ferrous salts, a dark brown solution being formed, 
which is readily _ decomposed by heat, with evolution of nitric oxide. 
It combines with oxygen to form _ nitrogen peroxide. Nascent 
hydrogen reduces it to hydroxy lamine (q.v.), whilst solutions of 
hypochlorites oxidize it to nitric acid. In some instances it reacts 
as a reducing agent, e.g. silver oxide is reduced to metallic silver at 
1 70° C, lead dioxide to the monoxide and manganese dioxide to 
sesquioxide. 

Nitrogen trioxide, N 2 0», was first mentioned by J. R. Glauber in 
1648 as a product of the reaction between nitric acid and arsenious 
oxide. Sir W. Ramsay (Jour. Chem. Soc, 1890, 5, p. 590), by distil- 
ling arsenious oxide with nitric acid and cooling the distillate, 
obtained a green liquid which consisted of nitrogen trioxide and 
peroxide in varying proportions, and concluded that the trioxide 
could not be obtained pure. He then tried the direct combination 
of nitric oxide with liquid nitrogen peroxide. A dark blue liquid is 
produced, and the first portions of gas boiling off from the mixture 
correspond fairly closely in composition with nitrogen trioxide. 
H. B. Baker (Jour. Chem. Soc, 1907, 91, p. 1862) obtained nitrogen 
trioxide in the gaseous form by volatilizing the liquid under special 
conditions. L. Francesconi and N. Sciacca (Gazz., 1904, 34 (i.), 
p. 447) have shown that liquid nitric oxide and oxygen, or gaseous 
nitric oxide and liquid oxygen, mixed in all proportions and yielded 
nitrogen trioxide, whilst gaseous nitric oxide mixed with excess of 
oxygen always gave the trioxide if the mixture was kept below 
-1 io° C. They also state that nitrogen trioxide is stable at ordinary 
pressure up to -21° C. N. M. v. Wittorf (Zeit. anorg. Chem., 1904, 
4 1 ! P- 85) obtained blue crystals of the trioxide (melting at -103° C.) 
on saturating liquid nitrogen peroxide with nitric oxide and cooling 
the mixture. The liquid prepared by Baker is green in colour, 
and has a specific gravity i-ii at- ordinary temperature, but below 
-2° C. becomes of a deep indigo blue colour. It forms a mass of 
deep blue crystals at the temperature of liquid air. It is exceedingly 
soluble in concentrated sulphuric acid. 

Nitrogen peroxide, N0 2 or N 2 0<, may be obtained by mixing 
oxygen with nitric oxide and passing the red gas so obtained through 
a freezing mixture. The production of this red gas when air is 
mixed with nitric oxide was mentioned by R. Boyle in 167 1. Nitrogen 
peroxide is also prepared by heating lead nitrate and passing the 
products of decomposition through a tube surrounded by a freezing 
mixture, when the gas liquefies. At low temperatures it is a colour- 
less crystalline solid which melts at -10-14° C. (W. Ramsay, Chem. 
News, 1900, 61, p. 91), As the temperature increases the liquid 
becomes yellowish, the colour deepening with rise of temperature until 
at +15° C. it has a deeporange tint. The liquid boils at about 22° C. 
This change of colour is accompanied by a change in the vapour 
density, and is explained by the fact that nitrogen peroxide 
consists of a mixture of a colourless compound N 2 C>4, and a red- 
brown gas NOj, the latter increasing in amount at the expense 
of the former as the temperature is raised (G. Salet, Comptes rendus, 
1868, 67, p. 488; see also E. and L. Natanson, Wied. Ann., 1885, 24, 
p. 454; 1886, 27, p. 606). M. Berthelot and J. Ogier (Bull. Soc. 
Chim. f 1882 [2], 37, p. 434; 38, p. 60) have also shown that the 
specific heat of the gas decreases with increase of temperature until 
it reaches a minimum at about 198-253 C. Cryoscopic determina- 
tions of the molecular weight of nitrogen peroxide dissolved in 
glacial acetic acid show that it corresponds to the molecular formula 
N2O4 at low temperatures (W. Ramsay, Jour. Chem : Soc, 1888,53, 
>. 621). Nitrogen peroxide is the most stable^ oxide of nitrogen. 
_t is decomposed by water, giving at o° C. a mixture of nitric and 
nitrous acids: 2N02+H20 = HN03+HN02. It combines with 
sulphuric acid to form nitro-sulphonic acid, SC>2(OH)(N02). It does 
not support the combustion of a taper, but burning phosphorus and 
red-hot carbon will continue to burn in the gas. It converts many 
metallic oxides into mixtures of nitrates and nitrites, and attacks 
many metals, forming nitrates and being itself reduced to nitric 
oxide. It is an energetic oxidizing agent. 

Nitrogen pentoxide, N 2 Ot, was first obtained in 1849 by H. Sainte- 
Claire-Deville (Ann. Chim. Phys., 1850 [3], 28, p. 241) by the action 
of dry chlorine on silver nitrate: 4AgN03+2Cl2 = 4AgCl+2N 2 06 
+O2. It may also be obtained by distilling nitric acid over phosphorus 
pentoxide. It crystallizes in large prisms which melt at 29-30 C. 
to a yellowish liquid, which boils at 45-50 C. with rapid decomposi- 
tion. It is very unstable, decomposing slowly even at ordinary 
temperatures. It dissolves in water, forming nitric acid. 

Hyponitrous acid, H2N2O2, was first obtained in the form of its 
salts by E. Divers in 1871 (Chem. News, 23, p. 206) by reducing a 
solution of potassium nitrite with sodium amalgam, and subsequent 
precipitation as silver salt. Hyponitrites also result when hydroxy- 
amido-sulphonates, e.g. HONH-SOaNa, are hydrolysed by caustic 
alkalis (E. Divers and T. Haga, Jour. Chetn. Soc, 1889,55, p. 760), 
or when benzsulphohydroxamic acid, C 6 H$S0 2 'NH-OH, is treated in 
the same manner (O. Piloty, Ber. t 1896, 29, p. 1560). They may 
also be prepared by the action of mercuric or cupric oxides on alkaline 
solutions of hydroxylamine (A. Hantzsch, Ann., 1896, 292, p. 317); 
by the action of hydroxylamine sulphate on alkaline nitrites in the 
presence of lime or calcium carbonate, the mixture being rapidly 
neated to 6o° C; or by the hydrolysis of dimethyl nitroso-oxyurea, 
(CHi) 2 N-CO-N(NO)-OH (A. Hantzsch, Ber. f 1897, 30, p. 2356). 
The free acid, which crystallizes in brilliant scales, is best prepared 
by decomposing the silver salt with an ethereal solution of hydro- 
chloric acid, ft is very explosive, dissolves readily in water and 
behaves as a dibasic acid. It does not liberate iodine from potassium 
iodide, neither does it decolorize iodine solution. Bromine oxidizes 
it to nitric acid, but the reaction is^ not quantitative. In acid 
solution, potassium permanganate oxidizes it to nitric acid, but 
in alkaline solution only to nitrous acid.^ It decomposes slowly 
on standing, yielding water and nitrous oxide. The silver salt is a 
bright yellow solid, soluble in dilute sulphuric and nitric acids, and 
may be crystallized from concentrated solutions of ammonia. It 
slowly decomposes on exposure or on heating. The calcium salt, 
CaN 2 02-4H 2 0, formed by the action of calcium chloride on the silver 
salt in the presence of a small quantity of nitric acid, is a lustrous 
crystalline powder, almost insoluble in water but readily soluble in 
dilute acids. It is decomposed by sulphuric acid, with evolution of 
nitrous oxide. 

Nitrous acid, HN02, is found to some extent in the form of its 
salts in the atmosphere and in rain water. The pure acid has not yet 
been obtained, since in the presence of water it decomposes with 
formation of nitric acid and liberation of nitric oxide: 3HN0 2 
= HN03+2NO+H 2 0. Its salts may be obtained in some cases by 
heating the corresponding nitrates, but the method does not give 
good results. Sodium nitrite, the most commonly used salt of the 
acid, is generally obtained by heating the nitrate with metallic lead; 
by heating sodium nitrate with sulphur and sodium hydroxide, 
the product then being fractionally crystallized (Read, Holliday & 
Sons): 3NaN0 3 +S-t-2NaOH=Na2S94+3NaN02+H20; by oxidiz- 
ing atmospheric nitrogen in an electric arc, keeping the gases above 
f00° C, until absorption in alkaline hydroxide solution is effected 
v German Pat. 188188); or by passing air,_or a mixture of oxygen 
and ammonia, over heated metallic oxides (ibid., 168272). The salts 
of the acid are colourless or faintly yellow. In aqueous solution the 
free acid acts as an oxidizing agent, bleaching indigo and liberating 
iodine from potassium iodide, or it may act as a reducing agent since 
it readily tends to pass into nitric acid: consequently it discharges 
the colour of acid solutions of permanganates and chromates. The 
acid finds considerable use in organic chemistry, being employed to 
discriminate between the different types of alcohols and of amines, 
and also in the production of diazo, azo and diazo-amino compounds. 
It may be recognized by the blue colour it gives with diphenylamine 
sulphate and by its reaction with potassium iodide-starch paper. 

Nitrosyl chloride, NOC1, is obtained by the direct union of nitric 
oxide with chlorine; or by distilling a mixture of concentrated 
nitric and hydrochloric acids, passing the resulting gases into 
concentrated sulphuric acid and heating the so-formed nitrosyl 
hydrogen sulphate with dry salt: HNO s +3HCl = NOCl+C:i 2 
+ H2O; NOCS + H2SO4 = HC1 + NOSO,H; NO - SO4H + NaCl 
^NOCl+NaHSO* (W. A. Tilden, Jour. Chem. Soc, i860, p. 630). 
It is also prepared by the action of phosphorus pentachloride on 
potassium nitrite or on nitrogen peroxide. It is an orange-coloured 
gas which may be readily liquefied and by further cooling may be 
solidified. The liquid boils at — 5°C. and the solid melts at — 65 C. 
It forms double compounds with many metallic chlorides, and finds 
considerable application as a means of separating various members 
of the terpene group of compounds. It is readily decomposed by 
water and alkaline hydroxides, yielding a mixture of nitrite and 
chloride. On treatment with silver fluoride it yields nitrosyl fluoride, 
NOF (O. Run\ Zeit. anorg. Chem., 1905, 47, p. 190). Nitroxyl 
fluoride, N0 2 F, is formed by the action of fluorine on nitric oxide at 
the temperature of liquid oxygen (H. Moissan and P. Lebeau, Comptes 
rendus, 1905, 140, pp. 1573. 162 1). It is a gas at ordinary tempera- 
ture; when liquefied it boils at — 63^5° C. and on solidification melts 
at . "" I 39° C. Water decomposes it into nitric and hydrofluoric 
acids. Nitramide, NH 2 N0 2 , is^ obtained by the action of sulphuric 
and nitric acidson potassium imidosulphonate, or by the action of 
ice-cold sulphuric acid on potassium nitro-carbamate (J.Thieleand 
A. Lachmann, Ann., 1895, 288, p. 297): N02-NK-C0 2 K+H 2 S04 
= NH 2 N0 2 +K 2 S04+C0 2 . It crystallizesin prisms or leaflets which 
melt at 72-75°C ; and are readily soluble in water and in all organic 
solvents except ligroin. ft issomewhat volatile at ordinary tempera- 
ture, and its aqueous solution possesses a strongly acid reaction. 
It is very unstable, decomposing into nitrous oxide and water when 
mixed with copper oxide, lead chromate or even powdered glass. 
On reduction it gives a strongly reducing substance, probably 
hydrazine. According to A. Hantzsch (Ann., 1896, 292, pp. 340 et 
seq.) hyponitrous acid and nitramide are to be regarded as stereo- 
isomers, being the anti- and syn- forms of the same compound. 
Thicle, however, regards nitramide as imidonitric acid, HN :NO(OH>. 

Nitrogen sulphide, N4S4, first obtained by W. Gregory (Jour, 
pharm., 1835, 21, p. 315) by the action of ammonia on sulphur 
chloride, has been investigated by O. Ruff and E. Geisel (Ber., 
1904, 37. P- 157.3; 1905. 38, p. 2659), who also obtained it by dis- 
solving sulphur in liquid ammonia. It is a reddish-yellow crystalline 
solid, insoluble in water and melting at 178 C. It explodes readily 
when melted or subjected to shock. Dry hydrochloric acid gives 
ammonia but no nitrogen; with ammonia it gives N:SNH 2 and 
S :S(NH 2 )2 ; and with secondary amines it forms thiodiamines, S(NR 2 ) 2 , 
nitrogen and ammonia being liberated. VVhen heated with CSf to 
ioo° C. under pressure, it forms liquid nitrogen sulphide, N 2 S«, a 
mobile red liquid which solidifies to an iodine-like mass of crystals 
which melt at 10- 1 1_° C. Water, alkalis and acids decompose it into 
sulphur and ammonia (W. Muthmann, Zeit. anorg. Chem., 1897, 13, 
p. 200). 

For sulphonic acids containing nitrogen see Ammonia. 

Numerous determinations of the atomic weight of nitrogen have 
been made by different observers, the values obtained varying some- 
what according to the methods used. These methods have been 
purely chemical (either gravimetric or volumetric), physical (deter- 
minations of the density of nitrogen^ nitric oxide, &c.) or physico- 
chemical. P. A. Guye has given a critical discussion of the relative 
accuracy of the gravimetric and physico-chemical methods, and 
favours the latter, giving for the atomic weight a value less than 
14-01. The more important papers dealing with the subject are: 
J. Stas, CEuvres completes, i. pp. 342 et seq.; Lord Rayleigh, Proc. 
Roy. Soc. (1894), 55, p. 340; (1904) 73, p. 153; G. Dean, Jour. 
Chem. Soc. (1901), 79, p. 147; R. W. Gray, Jour. Chem. Soc. (1906), 
88, p. 1 1 74; A. Scott, Proc. Chem. Soc. (1905), 21, p. 309; P. A. 
Guye, Chem. News {1905), 92, pp. 261 et seq.; (1906) 93, p. 13 et 
seq.; D. Berthelot, Comptes rendus (1907), 144, p. 269. 


NITROGLYCERIN, C 3 H 5 (N0 3 ) 3 or CH2NO3 • CHNO3 • CH 2 N0 3 
glyceryl trinitrate, an explosive first obtained in 1846 by Ascanio 
Sobrero (Mem. Acad. Torino^ 1847) by acting with a mixture 
of strong nitric and sulphuric acids on glycerin at the ordinary 
temperature. .The reaction proceeds in several stages, mono-, 
di- and finally tri-nitrate being produced, the final stage requiring 
sulphuric acid as a dehydrator. When pure it is a very pale 
yellow oil of sp. gr. 1-614 at 4° C. and i-6o at 15° C. One gram 
requires for solution between 800 and 1000 c.c. of water, 4 c.c. 
of absolute alcohol or 18 c.c. of wood spirit, and it is scarcely 
at all soluble in glycerin itself, but mixes in all proportions with 
ether, acetone, ethyl acetate and benzene. 

In the manufacture glycerin is dropped in a very thin stream into 
a mixture of 3 parts of nitric (sp. gr. 1*5) and 5 parts of sulphuric acid 
(sp. gr i*8d.), the containing vessel being cooled bya water jacket 
and theacia mixture agitated by a stream of cooled air, the tempera- 
ture being kept at about 15 C. A considerable excess of acids is 
necessary for the completion and safety of the reaction, usually 
about 8 parts of the acid mixture to 1 of glycerin. The higher the 
strength of the acids the higher the yield of nitroglycerin and the 
smaller the loss by solution in the waste acids. In recent practice 
some sulphin trioxide, or fuming sulphuric acid, is added, so > that 
the mixture of acids contains less than 1 % of water. The action is 
very rapid, and the product, which rises to the top of the acids, 
is separated and washed successively with cold and then tepid water, 
and finally with water made slightly alkaline with sodium carbonate 
or hydroxide, to remove all adhering or dissolved acids which would 
otherwise render the product very unstable. Nitroglycerin dissolves 
a little water and then appears thick or milky. Generally it is either 
dried, after being separated from the wash water, by means of 
common salt, upon a layer of which the moist nitroglycerin is gently 
run and allowed to drain or filter through, or it is filtered through a 
mass of dry sponge or similar dry and porous material. 

Under ordinary pressure it boils at above 200° C. (L. de Bruyn). 
If gradually heated it begins to vaporize and decompose at about 
130°, and as a rule it detonates when heated slightly above this 
temperature, previously giving off some red fumes. A little vapour 
is given off at ordinary temperatures and pressures, and when under 
a few millimetres pressure only it rapidly vaporizes below 100 C. 
The freezing-point is uncertain, owing perhaps to the existence of 
two modifications, as suggested by Kast (Zetts. f. ges. Schiess- u. 
Sprengstoff, 1-225; see also S. Nauckhoff, Zeits. f. ang. Chem., 18, 
Heft 1 and 2). It is frequently given as 43 ° to 46 ° F. (about 6° to 
8° C.), and it is stated to be more sensitive to percussion when frozen 
(Beilstein). It crystallizes (in long needles) more easily when gently 
agitated during the cooling, or when mixed with such substances as 
kieselguhr. At one^ time it was transported all over America in a 
frozen condition without serious accidents, and according to Sir 
F. Nathan (Jour, Soc. Chem. Ind., 1908, 27, p. 5) it* is safer to export 
in the frozen state. To prevent the freezing of nitroglycerin in 
dynamite it has been proposed to add various substances, such as 
chlordinitroglycerin, nitrated diglycerin or tetranitrodiglycerol, 
and also mono-and di-nitroglycerin. The latter two have been studied 
by C. W. Will (Ber., 1908, 7, p. 407), who obtained two isomeric 
dinitroglycerins, one of which is eminently crystallizable and the 
other fluid. Both are sensitive to percussion, but a little less so than 
nitroglycerin. The mononitroglycerin also exists in two forms, 
neither of which is strictly speaking explosive. It appears that an 
addition of di nitroglycerin to nitroglycerin would materially retard 
its freezing or lessen its sensitiveness (see also C- Claessen, Ger. 
Pat. 210990 (1909)). 

Specific gravity 
Melting-point . 
Boiling-point 18 mm. 
Solubility . 
Mono. 
Di. 
Tri. 
1-40 
158° 
054° 
I55-I60 
70% 
1-47 
a hydrate, 26 
& hydrate (fluid) 
145 "about 
7-7% 
1-6 
labile, 2-2° 
stable, 12-2° 
160° 
•16% 

The liquid when soaked into a porous combustible substance like 
blotting-paper burns rapidly and quietly, and when struck with a 
hammer on a hard surface violently detonates ; when a little of the 
liquid is spread on an anvil and struck, the portion immediately 
under the hammer only will, as a rule, detonate, the remainder being 
scattered. Some solutions of nitroglycerin (in ether, acetone, &c.) 
burn quietly, and the same is the case when it is held in solution or 
suspension in a colloid substance, as gelatinized guncotton, &c. 

Strong sulphuric acid dissolves nitroglycerin, and this solution on 
being poured into water yields dinitroglycerin (see Will, loc. cit.) 
and also some mononitroglycerin. When the solution in the strong 
acid is allowed to stand, some nitric acid is first evolved, and as the 
temperature rises this is followed by a general decomposition of the 
substance, though not necessarily an explosive one. Shaken with 
mercury and sulphuric acid, nitroglycerin yields its nitrogen as nitric 
oxide; the measurement of the volume of this gas is a convenient 
mode of estimating nitroglycerin. Ammonium hydroxide has no 
appreciable action at ordinary temperatures, but strong solutions of 
sodium or potassium hydroxides start a decomposition, with rise of 
temperature, in which some nitrate and always some nitrite is pro- 
duced. Some glycerin may be re-formed, but with very strong 
alkaline solutions little of the glycerin molecule escapes destruction, 
oxalic acid and several other products resulting. Alcoholic solutions 
of the alkalis also produce much nitrite along with some formate 
and acetate. Calcium or potassium sulphides and potassium hydro- 
sulphides completely reduce nitroglycerin to glycerin, some^ of the 
sulphur being oxidized and some precipitated. Hydriodic acid 
reduces it to glycerin and nitric oxide. Aniline and similar bases are 
oxidized and partially nitrated by nitroglycerin, with the production 
of non-explosive compounds. 

The first attempts to utilize the explosive power of nitro- 
glycerin were made by Nobel in 1863; they were only partially 
successful until the plan, first applied by General Pictot in 1854, 
of developing the force of gunpowder in the most rapid manner 
and to the maximum extent, through initiative detonation, was 
applied by Nobel to nitroglycerin. Even then, however, the 
liquid nature of the substance, though advantageous in one or two 
directions, constituted a serious obstacle to its safe transport and 
storage and to its efficient employment; it was therefore not 
until Nobel produced plastic solid preparations by mixing the 
liquid with porous substances, such as gunpowder, or carbon and 
sulphur, and finally kieselguhr in a fine state of division, capable 
of absorbing and retaining considerable quantities of it, that it 
could be employed as a blasting agent (see Explosives, Dyna- 
mite, Cordite). (W. R. E. H.) 

Therapeutics. — Nitroglycerin has a sweet burning taste and is 
decidedly poisonous. Its vapour produces violent headache, and 
the same effect is often caused by handling compositions con- 
taining it. Prior to its use as an explosive, its alcoholic solution 
found application in medicine under the name of glonoin. 
Although a nitrate, its pharmacological actions resemble those 
of nitrites such as amyl nitrite, taken internally. The explana- 
tion is that in an alkaline medium at body heat nitroglycerin 
yields a nitrite, probably as a preliminary stage of resolution. 
Nitroglycerin shaken up with warm very dilute alkaline solutions, 
as sodium carbonate, for a few minutes only, always yields 
sufficient nitrite to give the diazoreaction; and, as stated, strong 
alkaline solutions always produce some nitrite as one of the 
decomposition products. This gradual conversion in the tissues 
is a valuable property of nitroglycerin, as its effects take longer to 
manifest themselves than is the case with amyl and other nitrites. 
Nitroglycerin is valuable as a preventive in cases of cardiac 
pain, such as angina pectoris, and it is also used in other condi- 
tions where it is desirable to reduce the arterial tension. The 
British Pharmacopoeia contains a liquor trinitrini (1%), and 
tablets made up with chocolate, each containing one-hundredth 
of a grain. 


NITZSCH, GREGOR WILHELM (1790-1861), German classical 
scholar, brother of Karl Immanuel Nitzsch, was born at 
Wittenberg on the 22nd of November 1790. In 1827 he was 
appointed professor of ancient literature at Kiel, but in 1852 
was dismissed by the Danish government for his German sym- 
pathies. In the same year he accepted a similar post at 
Leipzig, which he held till his death on the 22nd of July 1861. 
Nitzsch is chiefly known for his writings on the Homeric epic. 
In opposition to Wolf and Lachmann, he maintained that the 
Iliad and Odyssey were not an aggregate of single short poems, 
but long complete poems, composed by one and the same author 
according to a uniform plan with a central dramatic idea. 

His son, KARL WiLHELM Nitzsch (1818-1 880), became professor 
of history at Konigsberg in 1862, and at Berlin in 1872. 

The most important of his works were: Erkldrende Anmerkungen 
zu Homer* s Odyssee, i.-xii. (1826-1840); Die Sagenpoesie der Griechen 
(1852); Beitrdge zur Geschichte der epischen Poesie der Griechen 
(pub. 1862, ed. C. W. Nitzsch). See memoir by F. Lubker (1864); 
C. Bursian, Geschichte der klassischen Philologie in Deutschland (1883) 
and J. E. Sandys, Hist, of Class. SchoL iii. (1908), p. 105. . 


NITZSCH, KARL IMMANUEL (1 787-1 868), Lutheran divine, 
was born at the small Saxon town of Borna near Leipzig on 
the 21st of September 1787. His father, Karl Ludwig Nitzsch 
(1751-1831), who at that time was pastor and superintendent 
in Borna, and afterwards (1790) became professor at Wittenberg 
and director (181 7) of the seminary for preachers, has also left 
a name of some distinction in the theological world by a number 
of writings, among which may be mentioned a work entitled 
De discrimine revelationis itnperatoriae et didacticae prolusiones 
academicae (2 vols., 1830). Theologically, he represented a 
combination of supernaturalism and rationalism (supernatural 
rationalism or a Kantian rational supernaturalism). Karl 
Immanuel was sent to study at Schulpforta in 1803, whence 
he proceeded to the university of Wittenberg in 1806. In 1809 
he graduated, and in 1810 he became a Privatdozent at the 
university. Having become diaconus at the Schlosskirche in 
181 1, he showed remarkable energy and zeal during the bombard- 
ment and siege of the city in 1813. In 181 7 he was appointed 
one of the preceptors in the preachers' seminary which had been 
established at Wittenberg after the suppression of the university. 
From 1820 to 1822 he was superintendent in Kemberg, and in the 
latter year he was appointed professor ordinarius of systematic 
and practical theology at Bonn. Here he remained until called 
to succeed Marheineke at Berlin in 1847; subsequently ne became 
university preacher, rector of the university, provost of St 
Nicolai (in 1854) and member of the supreme council of the 
church, in which last capacity he was one of the ablest and most 
active promoters of the Evangelical Union. He died on the 21st 
of August 1868. He represented the Vermittelungsthcologie 
of the school of Schleiermacher. 

His son, Friedrich August Nitzsch (b. 1832), was made 
professor ordinarius of theology at Giessen in 1868 and at Kiel 
in 1872. He was the author of Grundriss der christl. Dogmcn- 
geschichte (1870, incomplete) and Das System des Boethius 
(i860), amongst other works. 

Karl Nitzsch 's principal works are: System der christlichen Lehre 
(1829; 6th ed., 1851; Eng. trans., 1849), Praktische Theolope 
(1847-1860; 2nd ed., 1 863-1 868), A kademische Vortr age uber chrtst- 
liche Glaubenslehre (1858) and several series of Predigten. " He took 
as his starting-point the fundamental thought of Schleiermacher, 
that religion is not doctrine but life, direct consciousness, feeling. 
At the same time he sought to bring religious feeling into closer 
connexion with knowledge and volition than Schleiermacher had 
done; he laid special stress — and justly-— on the recognition of a 
necessary and radical union of religion with^ morality, treating both 
dogmatics and ethics together accordingly in his System der christ- 
licnen Lehre " (Otto Pneiderer, Development of Theology, p. 123). 
His Protestantiscke Beantwortung, a reply to the Symbolik of Johann 
Adam Mohler (1796-1838), which originally appeared in the Studien 
w. Kritiken, of which he was one of the founders, may also be men- 
tioned. 

See Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie, and the Allgemeine deutsche 
Biographie; F. Lichtenberger, History of German Theology in the 
Nineteenth Century , pp. 185-196. 


NIU-CHWANG, a city of China, in the Manchurian province 
of Sheng-king (Liao-tung), in 40 53' N. and 122 7' E., about 
35 m. (90 m. by water) from the coast of the Gulf of Liao-tung, 
on what is now a small branch of the main eastern affluent of the 
Liao-ho. The population is estimated at 86,000. The city 
proper is a comparatively unimportant place with broken-down 
walls, but it is surrounded by a number of large and flourishing 
suburhs. About the beginning of the Ta-ts'ing dynasty (1644) 
Niu-chwang was the chief port on the river, but in the reign of 
K'ien-lung, owing mainly to physical changes, it was supplanted 
by T'ien-chwang-tai farther down the stream, and towards the 
close of the 18th century this had in turn to give place to Ying-tsze 
still nearer the mouth. In ignorance of these facts Niu-chwang 
(now scarcely to be reached by a flat-bottomed river boat) was 
chosen as one of the ports to be opened to foreign trade by the 
treaty of Tien-tsin; and, though Ying-tsze had of necessity 
to be adopted as the site of the foreign settlements, Europeans 
still continue to speak of it as the port of Niu-chwang. Ying-tsze 
(otherwise known as Ying-k'ou, Niu-k'ou and in Mandarin as 
Muh-k'ou-ying) lies on the left bank of the Liao-ho on the lowest 
dry portion of the plain, not much, above high- water mark. 
The British settlement immediately above the town has a river 
frontage of 1000 yds. opposite the deepest of the reaches, and runs 
back to the highway leading to Niu-chwang. Off the mouth of 
the river there is an extensive bar of hard mud which can only 
be crossed by certain channels at high tide, when it is covered 
by from 18 to 20 ft. of water; and the port is altogether closed 
by ice for four or five months of the year, between November 
and May. Niu-chwang has shown considerable vigour as a port 
of trade, sharing in the general prosperity of the provinces 
of Manchuria, of which it is the outlet. * It was opened to foreign 
trade in 1858. In 1864 the total value of trade was £934,374, 
in 1878 £2,606,134, in 1898 £4,634,470, while in 1904 the figures 
reached £5,950,895. The principal exports (29%) are beans, 
bean-cake, bean-oil and wild silk. The bean-cake is a popular 
article of food with the natives of Kwang-tung and Fuh-kien, 
and is also largely employed for manuring the rice and sugar 
fields in the neighbourhood of Shanghai, Amoy, Swatow, &c. 
Of imports (71 %) the principal are cotton yarn and cotton cloth, 
most of the latter being drawn from the United States in prefer- 
ence to English-made goods. The number of resident foreigners 
is about 150. Railways connect the port with Tientsin and 
Peking on the one hand, and with the Russian territories lying 
to the north on the other. In 1895 Niu-chwang was occupied 
by Japanese troops, and the town was included in the cession of 
territory originally granted by the treaty of peace. By a supple- 
mentary convention it was retroceded hy the Japanese under 
pressure of France and Russia. Niu-chwang suffered considerably 
from the disturbances of 1900 and again during the Russo- 
Japanese war. In 1900 the Russians defeated the Chinese 
troops who attacked the town, and took possession of the port, 
and administered affairs until they in their turn were driven 
out by Japanese. At the conclusion of the war the Japanese 
restored the port to China. 


NIUE (Savage Island or Niue-Fekai, as the natives call it), 
an island in the South Pacific Ocean, 14 m. long by 10 m. wide, 
in 1 9 10' S., 169 47' W. The entire island is an old coral reef 
upheaved 200 ft., honeycombed with caves and seamed with 
fissures. The soil, though thin, is, as in other limestone islands, 
very rich, and coco-nuts, tara, yams and bananas thrive. There 
is an abundant rainfall, but owing to the porous nature of the 
soil the water percolates into deep caves which have communica- 
tion with the sea, and becomes brackish. The natives, a mixed 
Polynesian and Melanesian people of Samoan speech, are the most 
industrious in the Pacific, and many of the young men go as 
labourers to other islands. The consequent minority of men has 
been destructive" of the sexual morality of the women, which 
formerly stood high. The natives are keen traders, and though 
uncouth in manners when compared with their nearest neigh- 
bours, the Tongans and Samoans, are friendly to Europeans. 
Their hostility to Captain Cook in 1774, which earned from him 
the name of Savage for the island, was due to their fear of foreign 
disease, a fear that has since been justified. The population 
(4079 in 1 901) is slightly decreasing. The natives are all Chris- 
tians, and the majority have learned to read and write, and to 
speak a little English, under the tuition of the London Missionary 
Society. They wear European clothes. The island became 
a British protectorate on the 20th of April 1900, and was made 
a dependency of New Zealand in October 1900, the native 
government, of an elected " king " and a council of headmen, 
being maintained. In 1900 there were thirteen Europeans on the 
island. The exports are copra, fungus and straw hats, which 
the women plait very' cleverly. 

See T. H. Hood, Notes of a Cruise in H.M.S. "Fawn "(Edinburgh, 
1863); J. L. Brenchley, Jottings during the Cruise of the " Curaqoa" 
(London, 1873); B. H. Thomson, Savage Island (London, 1902). 


NIVELLES (Flem. Nyvel), a town of Belgium in the province 
of Brabant, situated on the Thines 19 m. S. of Brussels. Pop. 
(1904) 12,109. It is a busy little place with many industries, 
notably the manufacture of parchment. The town is supposed 
to owe its origin to the foundation of a convent on the spot by 
Itta or Iduberge, wife of Pippin of Landen. The Romanesque 
church of St Gertrude, named after Itta's daughter, dates 
from the nth century, but has been badly restored and is dis- 
figured by a heavy tower. On the top of the tower is the effigy 
of a man in iron who strikes the hours with a hammer. 
He is called by the townspeople Jean de Nivelles, a celebrated 
baron of the 15th century whose title eventually became merged 
in that of the count de Homes (Horn). The church is supposed to 
occupy the site of Itta's convent. Close to Nivelles is Seneffe, 
where Conde defeated William of Orange in 1674, and at Nivelles 
itself the French under Marceau defeated the Austrians in 
1794. 


NIVERNAIS, LOUIS CHARLES BARBON MANCINI MAZ- 
ARINI, Due de (1716-1798), French diplomatist and writer, 
was born in Paris on the 16th of December 17 16, son of Philippe 
Jules Francois, due de Nevers, and Maria Anne Spinola, and great- 
nephew of Cardinal Mazarin. He was educated at the College 
Louis le Grand, and married at the age of fourteen. He served 
in the campaigns in Italy (1733) and Bohemia (1740), but had 
to give up soldiering on account of his weak health. He was 
subsequently ambassador at Rome (1 748-1 752), Berlin (i755~ 
1756) and London, where he negotiated the treaty of Paris (10th 
of February 1763). From 1787 to 1789 he was a member of the 
Council of State. He did not emigrate during the Revolution, 
but lost all his money and was imprisoned in 1 793. He recovered 
his liberty after the fall of Robespierre, and died in Paris on the 
25th of February 1798. In 1743 he was elected to the Academy 
for a poem entitled Dglie, and from 1763 he devoted the greater 
part of his time to the administration of the duchy of Nevers and 
to belles-lettres. He wrote much and with great facility; but 
his writings are of little value, his Fables being his best pro- 
ductions. His (Euvres completes were published in Paris in 1796; 
an edition of his (Euvres posthumes was brought out in Paris by 
Francois de Neuf chateau in 1 807 , and his Correspondance 
secrete was published in Paris by de Lescure in 1866. 

See L. Perey (pseud, for Mile. Luce Herpin), Un Pctit-Neveu de 
Mazarin (Paris, 1890); La Fin du XVIII* Steele: le ducde Nivernais 

! Paris, 1891), by^ the same writer; Sainte-Beuve, Causeries du lundi 
vol. xiii.); Dupin, Eloge du due de Nivernais (1840); Abbe* Blam- 
pignon, Le Due de Nivernais ; d'apres sa correspondance inSdite (1 


NIXIE, or Nixy, a female water-sprite. The word is adapted 
from Ger. Nixe> the male water-sprite being Nix. The general 
term covering both the male and female is " nicker/' a kelpie. 
This also appears in Dutch nikker. The Old Teutonic nikus 
may be connected with the root which appears in Gr. vl£eiv or 
viTTeiv, " to wash." 


NIXON, JOHN (181 5-1 899), English mining engineer and 
colliery proprietor, was born at Barlow, Durham, on the 10th 
of May 1815, the son of a farmer. He was educated at the village 
school, and at an academy in Newcastle-on-Tyne, where he 
distinguished himself in mathematics. Leaving school at 
fourteen, he worked on his father's farm for two years, and then 
apprenticed himself to Mr Joseph Gray, one of the leading 
mining engineers in the north of England, and agent to the 
second marquis of Bute; subsequently he obtained employment 
as " overman " at one of the Bute collieries in Durham. In 
1839 an advertisement drew him to the South Wales coalfield, 
where he was engaged in mine-surveying, and whence he pro- 
ceeded to France as engineer to a coal and iron company. 
Returning to England, he noticed while travelling on one of the 
Thames steamers that the Welsh coal in use gave off no smoke 
and was preferred to north country coal both on this ground 
and because of its greater power-producing efficiency. His 
experience in France now suggested to him that a profitable 
market for this coal might be established among the French 
iron-founders and manufacturers generally who had hitherto 
imported English north country coal. For some time he was 
unable to procure any of this special Welsh coal. Eventually, 
however, by expending all his small savings he secured a cargo, 
freighted a small craft, and sent it across to Nantes, where with 
some difficulty he persuaded the local manufacturers to try it on 
the understanding that he bore the expense of the experiments. 
These tests, carried out under Nixon's personal directions, 
proved highly successful, and in due course the French govern- 
ment gave him a contract for Welsh coal for the French navy, 
Nixon's visit to Nantes laid the foundations of the Welsh steam- 
coal trade, English manufacturers and shipowners imitating the 
example of their French rivals. At first Nixon only sold the 
coal on commission, but eventually acquired what appeared 
to him a prospective field for steam-coal in the Aberdare valley, 
and after seven years' working at last struck a rich seam. This 
property is now known as Nixon's Navigation Collieries. Nixon 
subsequently acquired or developed other South Wales steam 
collieries, which yielded him a considerable fortune. He was 
also the inventor of many mechanical improvements in colliery 
working. He died in London on the 3rd of June 1899. 

See J. E. Vincent, John Nixon, Pioneer of the Steam Coal Trade in 
South Wales (London, 1900). 


NIZAM, the hereditary title of the reigning prince of Hyderabad 
(q.v.) in India, derived from an Arabic word meaning order, or 
administration. The same word is found in Nazitn, applied to 
the Nawab of Bengal, and in Nizamat, the old term for criminal 
jurisdiction. Nizam-ul-Mulk ( = " administrator of the kingdom") 
was the title of Asaf Jah, the founder of the dynasty, a very 
able soldier and minister of the court of Aurangzeb, who was 
appointed governor of the Deccan in 17 13, and established his 
independence before his death in 1748. 


NIZAM [l] (1141-1203). Nizam-uddin Ami Mahommed Ilyas 
bin Yusuf, Persian poet, was born 535 a.h. (1141 a.d.). His 
native place, or at any rate the abode of his father, was in the 
hills of Kum, but as he spent almost all his days in Ganja in 
Arran (the present Elizavettpol) he is generally known as 
Nizami of Ganja or Ganjawl. The early death of his parents, 
which illustrated to him in the most forcible manner the unstable- 
ness of all human existence, threw a gloom over his whole life, 
and fostered in him that earnest piety and fervent love for 
solitude and meditation which have left numerous traces in his 
poetical writings, and served him throughout his literary career as 
a powerful antidote against the enticing favours of princely 
courts, for which he, unlike most of his contemporaries, never 
sacrificed a tittle of his self-esteem. The religious atmosphere of 
Ganja, besides, was most favourable to such a state of mind; 
the inhabitants, being zealous Sunnites, allowed nobody to 
dwell among them who did not come up to their standard of 
orthodoxy, and it is therefore not surprising to find that Nizami 
abandoned himself at an early age to a stern ascetic life, as full 
of intolerance to others as dry and unprofitable to himself. 
He was rescued at last from this monkish idleness by his inborn 
genius, which, not being able to give free vent to its poetical 
inspirations under the crushing weight of bigotry, claimed 
a greater share in the legitimate enjoyments of life and the 
appreciation of the beauties of nature, as well as a more 
enlightened faith of tolerance, benevolence, and liberality. The 
first poetical work in which NizamI embodied his thoughts on 
God and man, and all the experiences he had gained, was neces- 
sarily of a didactic character, and very appropriately styled 
Makhzanul Asrar, or " Storehouse of Mysteries," as it bears the 
unmistakable stamp of Sufic speculations. It shows, moreover, 
a strong resemblance to Nasir Khosrau's ethical poems and 
Sana'i's Hadikat-ulhaklkat, or " Garden of Truth." The date 
of composition, which varies in the different copies from 552 to 
582 a.h., must be fixed in 574 or 575 (1 178-1179 a.d.). Although 
the Makhzan is mainly devoted to philosophic meditations, 
the propensity of Nizaml's genius to purely epic poetry, which 
was soon to assert itself in a more independent form, makes 
itself felt even here, all the twenty chapters being interspersed 
with short tales illustrative of the maxims set forth in each. 
His claim to the title of the foremost Persian romanticist he 
fully established only a year or two after the Makhzan by the 
publication of his first epic masterpiece Khosrau and Shlrin, 
composed, according to the oldest copies, in 576 a.h. (1180 a.d.). 
As in all his following epopees the subject was taken from what 
pious Moslems call the time of " heathendom " — here, for 
instance, from the old Sassanian story of Shah Khosrau Parwiz 
(Chosroes Parvez), his love affairs with the princess Shlrin 
of Armenia, his jealousy against the architect Ferhad, for some 
time his successful rival, of whom he got rid at last by a very 
ingenious trick, and his final reconciliation and marriage with 
Shlrin; and it is a noteworthy fact that the once so devout 
Nizam! never chose a strictly Mahommedan legend for his 
works of fiction. Nothing could prove better the complete 
revolution in his views, not only on religion, but also on art. 
He felt, no doubt, that the object of epic poetry was not to teach 
moral lessons or doctrines of faith, but to depict the good and 
bad tendencies of the human mind, the struggles and passions of 
men; and indeed in the whole range of Persian literature only 
Firdusi and Fakhr-uddln As'ad Jorjani, the author of the older 
epopee Wis u. Ratnin (about the middle of the nth century), 
can compete with Nizami in the wonderful delineation of 
character and the brilliant painting of human affections, especially 
of the joys and sorrows of a loving and beloved heart. 

Khosrau and Shlrin was inscribed to the reigning atabeg 
of Azerbaijan, Abu. Ja'far Mahommed Pahlavan, and his brother 
Kizil Arslan, who, soon after his accession to the throne in 582 
a.h., showed his gratitude to the poet by summoning him to 
his court, loading him with honours, and bestowing upon him 
the revenue of two villages, Hamd and Nijan. Nizami accepted 
the royal gift, but his resolve to keep aloof from a servile court- 
life was not shaken by it, and he forthwith returned to his quiet 
retreat. Meanwhile his genius had not been dormant, and two 
years after his reception at court, in 584 a.h. (1188 A.D.), he 
completed his Diwdn, or collection of kasidas and ghazals 
(mostly of an ethical and parenetic character), which are said 
to have numbered 20,000 distichs, although the few copies 
which have come to us contain only a very small number of 
verses. About the same time he commenced, at the desire of 
the ruler of the neighbouring Shirvan, his second romantic 
poem, the famous Bedouin love-story of Laila and Majnftn, 
which has so many points in common with Ariosto's Orlando 
Furioso, and finished it in the short space of four months. A 
more heroic subject, and the only one in which he made a certain 
attempt to rival FirdousI, was selected by our poet for his third 
epopee, the Iskandarnama, or " Book of Alexander," also called 
Sharafnama or Iqbalnama-i-Iskandari (" The Fortunes of 
Alexander"), which is split into two divisions. The first or 
semi-historical part shows us Alexander the Great as the con- 
queror of the world, while the second, of a more ethical tendency, 
describes him in the character of a prophet and philosopher, 
and narrates his second tour through the world and his adven- 
tures in the west, south, east and north. There are frequent 
Sufic allegories, just as in the Makhzan; and quite imbued 
with pantheistic ideas is, for instance, the final episode of the 
first part, the mysterious expedition of Alexander to the fountain 
■of life in the land of darkness. As for the date of composition, 
it is evident, from the conflicting statements in the different 
MSS., that there must have been an earlier and a later recension, 
the former belonging to 587-589 a.h., and dedicated to the prince 
of Mosul, 'Izz-uddfn Mas*ud, the latter made for the atabeg 
Nusrat-uddln Abu Bakr of Azerbaijan after 593 a.h., since we 
find in it a mention of NizamTs last romance Haft Paikar, or 
the " Seven Beauties," which comprises seven tales related 
by the seven favourite wives of the Sassanian king Bahramgur. 
In this poem, which was written 593 a.h., at the request of 
{Nur-uddln Arslan of Mosul, the son and successor of the above- 
mentioned Mzz-uddin, Nizami returned once more from his 
excursion into the field of heroic deeds to his old favourite 
domain of romantic fiction, and added a fresh leaf to the laurel 
crown of immortal fame with which the unanimous consent of 
Eastern and Western critics has adorned his venerable head. 
The most interesting of the seven tales is the fourth, the story 
of the Russian princess, in which we recognize at once the 
prototype of Gozzi's well-known Turandot, which was afterwards 
adapted by Schiller for the German stage. The five mathnawis, 
from the Makhzan to the Haft Paikar, form Nizamfs so-called 
" Quintuple " (Khamsa) or " Five Treasures " (Panj Ganj), 
and have been taken as pattern by all the later epic poets in the 
Persian, Turkish, Chaghatai and Hindustani languages. Nizami 
died at Ganja in his sixty-fourth year, 599 a.h. (1203 a.d.). 

The fullest account of Nizami is given in Dr W. Bacher 1 sJVizamVs 
Leben und '" 
London, 
English 

Bacher's work have been corrected by Dr Rieu in his Catalogue of 
the Persian MSS. in the British Museum (1881), ii. 563 sqq. 

Principal Editions. — The whole Khamsa (lithographed, Bombay, 
1834 and 1838; Teheran, 1845); Makhzan-ul Asrar (edited by N. 
Bland, London, 1844; lithographed, Cawnpore, i860; English 
translation in MS. by Hatton Hindley, in the British Museum 
Add. 6961); Khosrau and Shtrtn (lithographed, Lahore, 1871; 
German translation by Hammer in Shtrln, ein persisches romantisches 
Gedichty Leipzig, 1809) ; Laila and Majnun (lithographed, Lucknow, 
1879; English translation by J. Atkinson, London, 1836); Haft 
Patkar (lithographed, Bombay, 1849; Lucknow, 1873; the fourth 
tale in German by F. von Erdmann, Behramgur und die russische 
Furstentochter ; Kasan, 1844); Iskandarnama r first part, with com- 
mentary (Calcutta, 1812 and 1825; text alone, Calcutta, 1853; 
lithographed with marginal notes, Lucknow, 1865; Bombay, 1861 
and 1875; English translation by H. Wilberforce Clarke, London, 
1881; compare also Erdmann, Ve expeditions Russorum Berdaam 
versus, Kasan, 1826, and Charmoy, Expedition d' Alexandre contre 
les Russes, St Petersburg, 1829); Iskandarnama-iBahrl, second 
part, edited by Dr Sprenger (Calcutta, 1852 and 1869). (H. E.) 


NIZHNE-TAGILSK, popularly known as Tagil, a town and 
ironworks of Russia, in the government of Perm, stands in a 
longitudinal valley on the eastern slope of the Ural Mountains, 
within a few miles of the place where the Tagil, cutting through 
the eastern wall of the valley, escapes to the lowlands to join 
the Tura, a tributary of the Tobol. The southern part of this 
valley is occupied by the upper Tagil, and its northern portion 
by the upper Tura, from which the Tagil is separated by a 
low watershed. Pop. (1897) 30,000, all Great-Russians and 
chiefly Nonconformists. The town is connected by railway 
(the first in Siberia) with Perm and Ekaterinburg, the latter 
distant 88 m. to the S.S.E. It was founded in 1725 by the 
Russian mine-owner Demidov, and is still the property of his 
family. Nizhne-Tagilsk is a central foundry for a number of 
iron-mines and other works scattered in the valley of the Tagil 
and its tributary the Salda. Gold, platinum and copper are also 
mined at Nizhne-Tagilsk. The town carries on a brisk corn 
trade. The inhabitants make wooden boxes and trays, which 
are sent to the fairs of Irbit and Nizhniy-Novgorod. 


NIZHNE-UDINSK, a town of East Siberia, in the government 
of Irkutsk, 315 m. by rail W.N.W. of Irkutsk, on the Siberian 
railway, and on the Uda river. It is a centre for the Biryusa 
gold mines, and in winter the head of a line of comm urn cation 
with the Lena and Bratsky Ostrog, on the Angara. Pop. (1897) 
S803. 


NIZHNIY-NOVGOROD or Nijni-Novgorod, abbreviated into 
Nizhegorod, a government of Central Russia, bounded by the 
governments of Vladimir on the W., Kostroma and Vyatka 
on the N. and N.E., Kazan and Simbirsk on the E., and Penza 
and Tambov on the S., with an area of 19,792 sq. m., two-thirds 
being on the right and the rest on the left bank of the Volga. 
The smaller portion, with the exception of the better-drained 
lands close to the river, is a low, flat, marshy region, covered 
with, thick forests and sandy hills, and thinly peopled. The 
space between the Oka and the Volga, in the west, is also flat 
and forest-grown. The best part of the government is that to 
the east of the Oka; it is hilly, trenched by deep ravines and 
better drained, and has patches of fertile black earth in the south. 
The government is drained by the Volga with its tributaries, 
the Kerzhenets and the Vetluga on the left, and the Sura (with 
the Pyana) and the Oka on the right. These and their numerous 
tributaries offer great facilities both for navigation and for the 
transportation of timber. Numerous small lakes dot the govern- 
ment, especially in the north, and close upon two-fifths of its 
entire surface is still covered with forests, which occupy nearly 
the whole of the Zavolyi (to the north of the Volga), and extend 
without a break for 50 and 80 m. to the west and south-west 
respectively. The climate is severe, especially in the Zavolyi, 
where the average yearly temperature is 5-6° Fahr. lower than 
at Nizhniy. Besides the Carboniferous, Permian and Triassic 
deposits (" variegated marls "), Jurassic deposits are found in 
patches, chiefly in the south-east, as also in the south-west and 
north. They are overlain with Cretaceous black clays and 
sandstones. Thick strata of Tertiary sands, containing petrified 
wood, are found in the Ardatov district, and over the whole 
lie Glacial deposits, sandy gravels and clays. 

Black earth, known as the " black earth of the plateau," 
prevails on the high plains between the river valleys in the 
south-east; the " valley black earth," even more fertile than 
the former, covers the gently-sloping portions of the territory, 
also in the south-east. More or less sandy clays are met with 
elsewhere, and there are large patches of sand. Iron ores (brown 
and spherosideritic), alabaster, limestone, sand (used for glass), 
salt and phosphorites are the chief useful minerals. There are 
also extensive deposits of peat. 

The population increased from 1,376,000 in 1880 to 1,602,292 
in 1897; of these 841,245 were women, and 140,347 lived in 
towns. The estimated pop. in 1906 was 1,823,600. They consist 
of Russians, to the extent of 88%; Mordvinians, to the number 
of 53,100; Cheremisses, 6700; with Tatars and Chuvashes. 
Of the total number in 1897 1,525,735 were Orthodox and Old 
Believers, 75,848 Raskolniks (Nonconformists), 51,236 Mussul- 
mans and 3388 Jews. Both the birth-rate (53 in 1000) and the 
death-rate (42 in 1000) are high. A little over 53 % of the area is 
available for agriculture, and of this 59% is owned by noblemen 
and 16% only by the peasantry, the remainder being owned by 
merchants and others. Of the cultivable land owned by the 
peasantry 55% is under crops, but of similar land owned by 
noblemen only 30% is cultivated. The principal crops are wheat, 
rye, oats, barley, pease and potatoes. In some years the yield is 
quite insufficient for the population, and every year over 100,000 
persons quit their villages in quest of temporary work in neigh- 
bouring governments. The zemsivo or district council of Nizhniy- 
Novgorod supports an agricultural school, an experimental farm 
and an agency for the purchase of improved seeds and machinery. 
The live-stock industry is inferior, as many as 41 % of the peasant 
families having no horses, and 24% no cows. The domestic 
trades, such as the making of cutlery, felts, woollens, leather 
goods, wooden wares (sledges, spoons, boxes, window-frames, 
&c.), gloves, wirework, hardware, mats and sacks, are widely 
practised; 70% of the male working population among the 
peasants earn their livelihood in this way, as well as by shipping. 
This last is an industry of considerable magnitude, goods being 
shipped and unshipped to the annual value of over £5,000,000. 
Many of the villages and towns have each its own speciality, 
those in the district of Semenov being famous for wooden spoons, 
in Gorbatov for cutlery and locks, in Balakhna for spindles, in 
Makaryev for fancy boxes, in Arzamas, Knyaginin and Sergach 
for furs and leather goods. The Mordvinians and Cheremisses keep 
bees. Fruit and vegetables are cultivated along the Oka and the 
Volga. The factories are steadily developing, iron and machinery 
works, flour-mills, potteries, tanneries, shipbuilding yards, saw- 
mills and distilleries are the more important. Education, owing 
to the efforts of the zemslvo, is in a better condition than in many 
other governments of Russia. (P. A. K.; J. T. Be.) 


NIZHNIY-NOVGOROD, or simply Nizhniy, a town of Russia, 
capital of the above government, situated at the confluence of 
the Oka and the Volga, 272 m. by rail E. of Moscow. It occupies 
an advantageous position on the great artery of Russian trade, 
at a place where the manufactured and agricultural products of 
the basin of the Oka meet the metal wares from that of the Kama, 
the corn and salt brought from the south-eastern governments, 
the produce of the Caspian fisheries, and the various wares 
imported from Siberia, Central Asia, Caucasia and Persia. It 
has thus become the seat of the great Makaryevskaya fair (see 
below), and one of the chief commercial centres of Russia. 
Its importance was still further increased during the latter part 
of the 19th century in consequence of the growth of manufactur- 
ing industry in the Oka basin, the rapid development of steam- 
boat traffic on the Volga and its tributaries, the extension of the 
Russian railway system and the opening of Central Asia for 
trade. 

Nizhniy-Novgorod consists of three parts: the upper city, 
including the Kremlin; the lower town, or Nizhniy Bazaar; 
and " the Fair," with the suburb of Kunavino. The upper city 
is built on three hills, which rise as steep crags 400 ft. (490 ft. 
above sea-level) above the right bank of both the Oka and the 
Volga. The Kremlin, or old fort, occupies one of these hills 
facing the Volga. It was begun in the second half of the 14th 
century, but was erected chiefly in the beginning of the 16th, 
on the site of the old palisaded fort, and has a wall 2300 yds. long, 
and 65 to 95 ft. high, with eleven towers; it contains the law- 
courts, the governor's residence, the arsenal, barracks, the 
military gymnasium of Count Arakcheev (transferred from old 
Novgorod), a small museum and two cathedrals, Preobrazhenski 
and Arkhangelski. These last were erected in 1225 and 1222 
respectively, and have been rebuilt more than once; the present 
structures, in somewhat poor taste, date from 1 829-1 834 and 
1 732 respectively. The Preobrazhenski cathedral retains several 
relics of the past, such as holy pictures of the 14th and 17th 
centuries and a Bible of 1408; Minin, the hero of Nizhniy (see 
below) lies buried there. The Kremlin is adorned with a square, 
containing a monument to Minin and Pozharsky erected in 1826, 
and pretty boulevards have been laid out along its lower wall. 
The view from the Kremlin of the broad Volga, with its low- 
lying and far-spreading left bank, is very striking. The Pechersky 
monastery, close by, is archaeologically interesting; it was built 
in the first half of the 16th century — instead of the old monastery 
founded in 1330 and destroyed by a land-slip in 1596 — and has 
several antiquities and a library which formerly contained very 
valuable MSS., now at St Petersburg. Another monastery, 
that of Blagovyeshchensk (1370, rebuilt 1647), is situated on the 
right bank of the Oka. Its old churches have been destroyed by 
fire, but it has a very ancient holy picture — probably the oldest in 
Russia, dating from 993, which attracts many pilgrims. In 
1004 a town-house and a monument to Tsar Alexander II. were 
built in the principal square of the upper town. Besides the 
Kremlin, the upper town contains the best streets and public 
buildings. Five descents lead from it to the lower town, planted 
on the alluvial terrace, 30 to 35 ft. above the banks of the Oka 
and the Volga, and in the centre of a very lively traffic. Piles 
of salt line the salt wharves on the Oka; farther down are the 
extensive storehouses and heaps of grain of the corn wharves; 
then comes the steamboat quay on the Volga, opposite the 
Kremlin, and still farther east the timber wharves. The fair is 
held on the flat sandy tongue of land between the Oka and the 
Volga, connected with the town by only a bridge of boats, 1500 
yds. long, which is taken to pieces in winter. The shops of the 
fair, 4000 in number, built of stone in regular rows, are surrounded 
by a canal, and cover half a square mile. Outside this inner 
fair are nearly 4000 more shops. Several buildings have been 
erected, and institutions established, in connexion with the fair, 
e.g. the house of the committee (1890), banks, a theatre, a circus, 
a new semicircular canal and a second floating bridge, under- 
ground galleries, a water-supply, an electrical tramway, temper- 
ance tea-shops and restaurants kept by the Society of Tradesmen. 
The Siberian harbour is conspicuous during the fair on account 
of its accumulations of tea boxes and temporary shelters, in 
which the different kinds of tea are tried and appraised by 
tasters. The point of the peninsula is occupied by the store- 
houses of the steamboat companies, while metal wares and corn 
are discharged on a long island of the Oka, at the iron harbour 
and in Grebnovskaya harbour. An island in the Volga is the 
place where various kinds of rough wares are landed. The rail- 
way from Moscow has its terminus close to the fair buildings, 
to the south of which is the suburb of Kunavino, widely known 
throughout the East as a place for amusements of the lowest kind 
during the fair. On the fair side the Alexander Nevski cathedral 
was erected in 1881, and there too is the older " Fair " cathedral 
of 1822. 

The climate of Nizhniy is harsh and continental, the yearly 
average temperature being 39 Fahr. (io-6° in January and 64 
in July), and the extreme thermometric readings -40 and 
104 Fahr. The town has a settled population of (1897) 90,053 
inhabitants, who are nearly all Great-Russians, and many of 
them Nonconformists. The mortality exceeds the birth-rate. 
The educational institutions include a military school, a technical 
school, a theological seminary, and two schools for sons and 
daughters of the clergy. 

The manufactures include steam flour-mills, iron and 
machinery works, manufactories of ropes and candles, distil- 
leries and potteries. Shipbuilding, especially for the transport 
of petroleum on the Caspian Sea, and steamboat building, have 
recently advanced considerably. Nizhniy is the chief station of 
the Volga steamboat traffic. The first steamer made its appear- 
ance on the Volga in 1821, but it was not till 1845 that steam 
navigation began to assume large proportions. The merchants 
carry on a brisk trade, valued (apart from that of the fair) at 
more than £2,000,000 of purchases and £1,800,000 of sales; 
the principal items are corn (£200,000 to £500,000), salt, iron, 
tea, fish, groceries and manufactured goods. 

The chief importance of the city is due to its fair, which is 
held from the 29th of July to the 10th of September. From 
remote antiquity Russian merchants were wont to meet in 
summer with those from the East at different places on the Volga, 
between the mouths of the Oka and the Kama — the fair changing 
its site with the increasing or decreasing power of the nation- 
alities which struggled for the possession of the middle Volga. 
Bolgari, Nizhniy-Novgorod, Kazan and Vasilsursk have succes- 
sively been its seat since the 10th century. From 1641 its seat 
was at a monastery 55 m. below Nizhniy and close to Makaryev 
(whence its present name). The situation, however, being in 
many ways inconvenient, and a conflagration having destroyed 
the shops at Makaryev, the fair was transferred in 181 7 to its 
present locality at Nizhniy-Novgorod. 

The goods mostly dealt in are cotton, woollen, linen and silk stuffs 
(35 to 38 % of the whole), iron and iron wares, furs and skins, pottery, 
salt, corn, fish, wine and all kinds of manufactured goods. The 
Russian goods constitute four-fifths of the whole trade; those 
brought from Asia — tea (imported via Kiakhta and via Canton 
and Suez), raw cotton and silk, leather wares, madder and various 
manufactured wares — do not exceed 10 or 11%. Manufactured 
wares, groceries and wines are the goods principally imported from 
western Europe. The total turnover of goods sold and " ordered " 
amounts to nearly 36^ millions sterling annually. The former 
category dropped, however, from 26 millions in 1881 to 14 millions 
in 1905. 

In 1880, the Russian manufacturers depending chiefly on the 
barter-trade in tea at Kiakhta, their production was regulated 
principally by the prices of tea established at the fair; but now 
cotton takes the lead, and the prospective outout for the year of the 
mills of central Russia is determined at the fair by the price of raw 
cotton imported from Asia, by that of madder, and bv the results of 
the year's crop, which became known during the fair. The same 
holds good with regard to all other stuffs, the prices of wool (pro- 
visionally established at the earlier fairs of south-western Russia) 
being ultimately settled at Nizhniy, as well as those of raw silk. 
The whole of the iron production of the Urals depends also on the 
same fair. The " caravans " of boats laden with iron-ware, starting 
from the Urals works in the spring, reach Nizhniy in August, after a 
stay at the fair of Laishev, which supplies the lower Volga; and the 
purchases of iron made at Nizhniy for Asia and middle Russia deter- 
mine the amount of credit that will be granted for the next year's 
business to the owners of the ironworks, on which credit most of 
them entirely depend. The fair thus influences directly all the 
leading branches of Russian manufacture. It exercises a yet greater 
influence on the corn and 'salt trades throughout Russia, and still 
more on the whole of the trade in Siberia and Turkestan, both de- 
pending entirely on the conditions of credit which the Siberian and 
Turkestan merchants obtain at the fair. 

The Makaryevskava fair attracts no fewer than 400,000 people 
from all parts of Russia, and partly from Asia. 

Two other fairs of some importance are held at Nizhniy — one for 
wooden wares on the ice of the Qka, and another, in June, for horses. 

History. — The confluence of the Oka and the Volga, inhabited 
in the 10th century by Mordvinian tribes, began to be coveted 
by the Russians as soon as they had occupied the upper Volga, 
and as early as the nth century they established a fort, 
Gorodets, 20 m. above the mouth of the Oka. In 1221, the 
people of Suzdal, under Yuri Vsevolodovich, prince of Vladimir, 
erected a fort on the hill now occupied by the Kremlin of Nizbniy. 
Until the beginning of the 14th century Nizhniy-Novgorod, 
which grew rapidly as the Russians colonized the banks of the 
Oka, remained subject to Suzdal; it enjoyed, however, almost 
complete independence, being ruled by its popular assembly. 
In the 14th century, until 1390, it elected its own princes. Ill- 
protected by its palisaded walls, it was plundered in 1377 and 
1378 by the Tatars, supported by the Mordvinians. In 1390 
Prince Vasili of Moscow, in alliance with Toktamish, khan of the 
Golden Horde of the Mongols, took Nizhniy and established his 
own governors there; in 1417 it was definitely annexed to 
Moscow, becoming a stronghold for the further advance of that 
principality towards the east. It was fortified in 1508-1511, 
and was able to repel the Tatars in 1513, 1520 and 1536. The 
second half of the 16th century was for the city a period of 
peaceful and rapid development. It became a depot for all 
merchandize brought from the south-east, and even English 
merchants established ^warehouses there. With the fall of 
Kazan, and the opening of free navigation on the Volga, it 
became the starting-place for the " caravan " of boats yearly 
sent to the lower Volga under the protection of a military force, 
whilst the thick forests of the neighbourhood favoured the 
development of shipbuilding. In 1606-1611 the trading classes 
of Nizhniy took an active part in the expeditions against the 
revolted serfs, and it was a Nizhniy dealer in cattle, Kozma 
Minin Sukhorukov, who took the initiative in sending an army 
for the delivery of Moscow from the Poles in 1612. In 1667 the 
robber chieftain, Stenka Razin, made an unsuccessful attempt 
to capture the city. During the 17th century the country around 
Nizhniy became the seat of a vigorous religious agitation, and 
in its forests the Raskolniks established hundreds of their 
monasteries and communities, those of the Kerzhenets playing 
an important part in the history of Russian Nonconformity 
even to the present time. 

Nizhniy-Novgorod had at one time two academies, Greek and 
Slav, and took some part in the literary movement of the end of 
the 1 8th century; its theatre also was of some importance in the 
history of the Russian stage. (P. A. K; J. T. Be.) 


NOAH (o), rest; Septuagint, New Testament, Philo, Josephus, 
Ntoe, N<£xos," Ncoeos: Vulg. Noe). According to Gen. v.-x. the 
tenth patriarch in direct descent from Adam, counting Adam 
as the first; the son of Lamech; the father of Shem, Ham and 
Japheth; and the builder of the Ark, in which he and his 
family, &c. &c, were saved from a universal flood (see Deluge). 
After the flood subsided God made a covenant with Noah per- 
mitting the use of animal food, on condition that the flesh is not 
eaten with the blood; and forbidding homicide (ix. 1-7, cf. 
i. 29 f., both P.). Noah was the first to cultivate the vine and to 
experience the consequences of over-indulgence in its products, an 
occasion which called forth the filial respect of two of his sons 
and the irreverence of the third. Through his sons he became 
the ancestor of the whole human race. The name is mentioned 
in the genealogy in 1 Chron. i. 4; the " waters of Noah " occur 
in Isaiah liv. 9; and Noah is mentioned with Daniel and Job 
as an ancient worthy in Ezek. xiv. 14, 20. The story is referred 
to in the New Testament in Matt. xxiv. 37 f.; Luke iii. 36, 
xvii. 26 f.; Heb. xi. 7; 1 Pet. iii. 20; 2 Pet. ii. 5. 

The name Noah is explained in Gen. v. 29 as connected with 
the root nhm " comfort," but this is etymologically impossible. 
As a Hebrew word it might connect with ntiah, " rest "; and the 
Septuagint has, "he will give us rest," instead of "he will 
comfort us "; and this is sometimes accepted as the original 
reading. 

As the tenth patriarch Noah corresponds to the tenth pre- 
historic Babylonian king, Xisuthros in Berossus, Ut-napistim 
or Atrahasis in the cuneiform tablets, the hero of the Babylonian 
flood story. 

Gen. ix. 20-27 is a distinct episode, and has no necessary con- 
nexion with the narrative of the Deluge. Probably, as Gunkel, 
Dillmann and others suggest, it came originally from a cycle of 
stories different from that which contained the account of the 
Flood. There are some apparent inconsistencies. Noah is called 
" the husbandman." The proper rendering of verse 20 is " and 
Noah, the husbandman, was the first to plant a vineyard," the 
E.V.: " And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted 
a vineyard," is incorrect. It seems, therefore, that in the original 
context Noah had been described as " the husbandman," a title 
in no way suggested by Gen. vi, o-ix. 19. Moreover, even after 
making allowance for lack of experience as to the effect of the 
new product, drunkenness and exposure hardly tally with the 
statement that " Noah was a just-man and perfect in his genera- 
tions, and Noah walked with God," vi. 9. This indeed comes 
from the late Priestly Code; but we are also told in the earlier 
story that " Noah found favour in the eyes of the Lord," vi. 8. 

The name also occurs in the Bible (nyi, NouA, Noa) for the 
daughter of Zelophehad, of the tribe of Manasseh. Zelophehad 
having only daughters, the case is made the occasion of laying 
down the law that where there are no sons daughters inherit, 
but must marry within their own tribe (Num. xxvi. 33, xxvii. 1, 
xxxvi. 11; Josh. xvii. 3, all Priestly Code). (W. H. Be.) 


NOAILLES, the name of a great French family, derived from 
the castle of Noailles in the territory of Ay en, between Brive 
and Turenne in the Limousin, and claiming to date back to the 
nth century. It did not obtain fame until the 16th century, 
when its head, Antoine de Noailles (1504-1562), became admiral 
of France, and was ambassador in England during three im- 
portant years, 1553-1556, maintaining a gallant but unsuccessful 
rivalry with the Spanish ambassador, Simon Renard. Henri 
(1554-1623), son of Antoine, was a commander in the religious 
wars, and was made comte d'Ayen by Henry IV. in 1593. Anne 
(d. 1678), the grandson of the first count, played an important 
part in the Fronde and the early years of the reign of Louis XIV., 
became captain-general of the newly won province of Roussillon, 
and in 1663 was made due d'Ayen, and peer of France. The sons 
of the first duke raised the family to its greatest fame. The 
eldest son, Anne Jules (1650-1708), was one of the chief generals 
of France towards the end of the reign of Louis XIV., and, 
after raising the regiment of Noailles in 1689, he commanded 
in Spain during the war of the Spanish succession, and was made 
marshal of France in 1693. A younger son, Louis Antoine 
(1651-1729), was made archbishop of Paris in 1695, holding this 
high dignity until his death; he was made a cardinal in 1699. 
The name of Noailles occurs with almost confusing reiteration 
throughout the 18th century. Adrien Maurice (1678-1766), 
the third duke, served in all the most important wars of the reign 
of Louis XV. in Italy and Germany, and became a marshal 
in 1734. His last command was in the war of the Austrian 
succession, when he was beaten by the English at the battle of 
Dettingen in 1743. He married Francoise d'Aubign6, a niece of 
Madame de Maintenon and two of his sons also attained the rank 
of marshal of France. The elder, Louis (1713-1793), who bore 
the title of due d'Ayen till his father's death in 1766, when he 
became due de Noailles, served in most of the wars of the 18th 
century without particular distinction, but was nevertheless made 
a marshal in 1775. He refused to emigrate during the Revolution, 
but escaped the guillotine by dying in August 1793, before the 
Terror reached its height. On the 4th Thermidor (July 22) 
the aged duchesse de Noailles was executed with her daughter-in- 
law, the duchesse d'Ayen, and her granddaughter, the vicomtesse 
de Noailles. Jean Paul Francois (1 739-1824), the fifth duke, 
was in the army, but his tastes were scientific, and for his emin- 
ence as a chemist he was elected a member of the Academy of 
Sciences in 1777. He became due d'Ayen in 1766 on his grand- 
father's death, and due de Noailles on his father's in 1793. 
Having emigrated in 1792, he lived in Switzerland until the 
Restoration in 1814, when he took his seat as a peer of France. 
He had no son, and was succeeded as due de Noailles by his 
grand-nephew, Paul (1802-1885), who won some reputation 
as an author, and who became a member of the French Academy 
in the place of Chateaubriand in 1849. The grandfather of 
Paul de Noailles, and brother of the fifth duke, Emmanuel 
Marie Louis (1743-1822), marquis de Noailles, was ambassador 
at Amsterdam from 1770-1776, at London 1776-1783, and at 
Vienna 1 783-1 792. 

One other branch of the family deserves notice. Philippe (1715- 
1794), comte de Noailles, afterwards due de Mouchy, was a younger 
brother of the fourth duke, and a more distinguished soldier than his 
brother. He served at Minden and in other campaigns, and was 
made a marshal on the same day as his brother. He was long in 
great favour at court, and his wife was first lady of honour to Marie 
Antoinette, and was nicknamed by her Madame Etiquette. This 
court favour brought down punishment in the days of the Revolution, 
and the old marshal and his wife were guillotined on the 27th of June 
1794. His two sons, the prince de Poix and the vicomte de Noailles, 
were members of the Constituent Assembly. 

Philippe Louis Marc Antoine, duke of Noailles and prince of 
Poix (1752-1819), was born on the 21st of Novemberi752. > In 1789 
he was elected deputy of the States-General by the nobility of the 
baiUiagcs of Amiens and Ham, but was compelled to resign in 
consequence of a duel with the commander of the Garde Nationalc 
at Versailles. He left the country for some time, but returned to 
France and took part in the revolution of the 10th of August I79 2 - 
He was, however, forced to quit the country once more to evade 
the fate of his father and mother. Returning to France in 1800, he 
lived quietly at his residence at Mouchy during the empire. At the 
Restoration he was brought again into favour and became a peer of 
France. He died at Paris on the 17th of February 18 19. 

Louis Marie (1756-1804), vicomte de Noailles, was the second 
son of the marshal. He served brilliantly under La Fayette in 
America, and was the officer who concluded the capitulation of York- 
town. He was elected to the States-General in 1789. He began the 
famous " orgie," as Mirabeau called it, on the 4th of August, when all 
privileges were abolished, and with d'Aiguillon proposedthe abolition 
of titles and liveries in June 1790. When the revolution became 
more pronounced he emigrated to America, and became a partner 
in Bingham's bank at Philadelphia. He was very successful, and 
might have lived happily had he not accepted a command against 
the English in San Domingo, under Rochambeau. He made a 
brilliant defence of the mole St Nicholas, and escaped with the 
garrison to Cuba; but in making for Havana his ship was attacked 
by an English frigate, and after a long engagement he was severely 
wounded, and died of his wounds on the 9th of January 1804. 


NOAKHALI, a town and district of British India, in the 
Chittagong division of eastern Bengal and Assam. The town, 
also known as Sudharam, is on a small river channel 10 m. from 
the sea. Pop (1901) 6520. The District of Noakhali has 
an area of 1644 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 1,141,728. The district 
consists of an alluvial tract of mainland, "together with several 
islands at the mouth of the Meghna. In general, each home- 
stead is surrounded by a tljick grove of betel- and coco-nut 
palms, and in the north-western tracts dense forests of betel-nut 
palms extend for miles. Rice is the great staple of cultivation. 
The district is very fertile; and, with the exception of some 
sandbanks and recent accretions, every part of it is under con- 
tinuous cultivation. The process of alluvion is gradually but 
steadily going on, the mainland extending seawards. Noakhali 
is peculiarly liable to destructive floods from the sea, generally 
caused by southerly gales or cyclones occurring at the time when 
the Meghna is swollen by heavy rains, and at flood-tides — the 
tidal bore being sometimes 20 ft. high, and moving at the rate 
of 15 m. an hour. The cyclone and storm-wave of the 31st of 
October 1876 was terribly disastrous, sweeping over the whole 
delta of the Meghna. The loss of human life was estimated at 
100,000. The east of the district is served by the Assam-Bengal 
railway. 

The Mahommedan population of the islands at the mouth of the 
Meghna practised piracy up to a comparatively recent date, and 
at the beginning of the 17th century Portuguese pirates, under 
Sebastian Gonzales, occupied Sandwip. They were ultimately 
reduced to subjection by Shaista Khan, the governor of Bengal, 
about the middle of the century; and their descendants have 
sunk to the level of the natives surrounding them, whose dress, 
customs and language they have, for the most part, adopted. 
They are Christians, and retain the old Portuguese names. 
About 1756 the East India Company established factories in 
Noakhali and Tippera, the ruins of some of which still remain. 


NOBEL, ALFRED BERNHARD (1833-1896), Swedish chemist 
and engineer, was the third son of Emmanuel Nobel (1801-1872), 
and was born at Stockholm on the 21st of October 1833. At 
an early age he went with his family to St Petersburg, where 
his father started torpedo works. In 1859 these were left to the 
care of the second son, Ludvig Emmanuel (1 831-1888), by 
whom they were greatly enlarged, and Alfred, returning to 
Sweden with his father, devoted himself to the study of ex- 
plosives, and especially to the manufacture and utilization of 
nitroglycerin. He found that when that body was incorporated 
with an absorbent, inert substance like kieselguhr it became 
safer and more convenient to manipulate, and this mixture he 
patented in 1867 as dynamite. He next combined nitro- 
glycerin with another high explosive, gun-cotton, and obtained 
a transparent, jelly-like substance, which was a still more 
powerful explosive than dynamite. Blasting gelatin, as it 
was called, was patented in 1876, and was followed by a host 
of similar combinations, modified by the addition of potassium 
nitrate, wood-pulp and various other substances. Some 
thirteen years later Nobel produced ballistite, one of the earliest 
of the nitroglycerin smokeless powders, containing in its 
latest forms about equal parts of gun-cotton and nitroglycerin. 
This powder was a precursor of cordite, and Nobel's claim that 
his ' patent covered the latter was the occasion of vigorously 
contested law-suits between him and the British Government 
in 1894 and r895. Cordite also consists of nitroglycerin and 
gun-cotton, but the form of the latter which its inventors wished 
to use was the most highly nitrated variety, which is not soluble 
in mixtures of ether and alcohol, whereas Nobel contemplated 
using a less nitrated form, which is soluble in such mixtures. 
The question was complicated by the fact that it is in practice 
impossible to prepare either of these two forms without ad- 
mixture of the other; but eventually the courts decided against 
Nobel. From the manufacture of dynamite and other explosives, 
and from the exploitation of the Baku oil-fields, in the develop- 
ment of which he and his brothers, Ludvig and Robert Hjalmar 
(1820-1896), took a leading part, he amassed an immense 
fortune; and at his death, which occurred on the 10th of 
December 1896 at San Remo, he left the bulk of it in trust for 
the establishment of five prizes, each worth several thousand 
pounds, to be awarded annually without distinction of nationality. 
The first three of these prizes are for eminence in physical 
science, in chemistry and in medical science or physiology; 
the fourth is for the most remarkable literary work dans le sens 
d'idtalisine; and the fifth is to be given to the person or society 
that renders the greatest service to the cause of international 
brotherhood, in the suppression or reduction of standing armies, 
or in the establishment or furtherance of peace congresses. 
See Les Prix Nobel en igoi (Stockholm, 1904). 


NOBILI, LEOPOLDO (1784-1835), Italian physicist, born at 
Reggio nelT Emilia in 1784, was in youth an officer of artillery, 
but afterwards became professor of physics in the archducal 
museum at Florence, the old habitat of the Accademia del 
Cimento. His most valuable contributions to science consist 
in the suggestion of the astatic combination of two needles for 
galvanometers, and in the invention of the so-called thermo- 
multiplier used by him and M. Melloni. In 1826 he described 
the prismatically-coloured films of metal, known as Nobili's 
rings, deposited electrolytically from solutions of lead and other 
salts when the anode is a polished iron plate and the cathode is 
a fine wire placed vertically above it. His papers were mostly 
published in the Bibliothbque universelle of Geneva. He died 
at Florence in August 1835. 


NOBILIOR, MARCUS FULVIUS, Roman general, a member of 
one of the most important families of the plebeian Fulvian 
gens. When praetor (193 B.C.) he served with distinction in 
Spain, and as consul in 189 he completely broke the power of the 
Aetolian league. On his return to Rome, Nobilior celebrated a 
triumph (of which full details are given by Livy) remarkable 
for the magnificence of the spoils exhibited. On his Aetolian 
campaign he was accompanied by the poet Ennius, who made 
the capture of Ambracia, at which he was present, the subject 
of one of his plays. For this Nobilior was bitterly attacked by 
Cato the Censor, on the ground that he had compromised his 
dignity as a Roman general. He restored the temple of Hercules 
and the Muses in the Circus Flaminius, placed in it a list of 
Fasti drawn up by himself, and endeavoured to make the 
Roman calendar more generally known. He was a great en- 
thusiast for Greek art and culture, and introduced many of its 
masterpieces into Rome, amongst them the picture of the 
Muses by Zeuxis from Ambracia. 


NOBILITY. To form a true understanding of what is strictly 
implied in the word " nobility," in its social as opposed to a 
purely moral sense, it is needful to distinguish its meaning from 
that of several words with which it is likely to be confounded. 
In England nobility is apt to be confounded with the peculiar 
institution of the British peerage. Yet nobility, in some shape or 
another, has existed in most places and times of the world's 
history, while the British peerage is an institution purely local, 
and one which has actually hindered the existence of a nobility 
in the sense which the word bears in most other countries. 
Nor is nobility the same thing as aristocracy. This last is a word 
which is often greatly abused; but, whenever it is used with 
any regard to its true meaning, it is a word strictly political, 
implying a particular form of government. But nobility is 
not necessarily a political term; the distinction which it implies 
may be accompanied by political privileges or it may not. Again, 
it is sometimes thought that both nobility and aristocracy are 
in some special way connected with kingly government. To 
not a few it would seem a contradiction to speak of nobility 
or aristocracy in a republic. Yet, though many republics have 
eschewed nobility, there is nothing in a republican, or even in a 
democratic, form of government inconsistent with the existence 
of nobility; and it is only in a republic that -aristocracy, in the 
strict sense of the word, can exist. Aristocracy implies the 
existence of nobility; but nobility does not imply aristocracy; 
it may exist under any form of government. The peerage, 
as it 'exists in the three British kingdoms, is something which 
is altogether peculiar to the three British kingdoms, and which 
has nothing in the least degree lite it elsewhere. 

Nobility, then, in the strict sense of the word, is the hereditary 
handing on from generation to generation of some acknow- 
ledged pre-eminence, a pre-eminence founded on hereditary 
succession, and on nothing else. Such nobility may be imme- 
morial or it may not. There may or there may not be a power 
vested somewhere of conferring nobility; but it is Defiaiiioa 
essential to the true idea of nobility that, when once 
acquired, it shall go on for ever to all the descendants — or, 
more commonly, only to all the descendants in the male line — 
of the person first ennobled or first recorded as noble. The 
pre-eminence so handed on may be of any kind, from substantial 
political power to mere social respect and precedence. It does 
not seem necessary that it should be formally enacted by law 
if it is universally acknowledged by usage. It may be marked 
by titles or it may not. It is hardly needful to prove that 
nobility does not imply wealth, though nobility without wealth 
runs some risk of being forgotten. This definition seems to 
take in all the kinds of nobility which have existed in different 
times and places. They have differed widely in the origin of 
the noble class and in the amount of privilege implied in member- 
ship of it; but they all agree in the transmission of some 
privilege or other to all the descendants, or to all the male 
descendants, of the first noble. 

In strictness nobility and gentry are the same thing. This 
fact is overshadowed in England, partly by the habitual use of 
the word " gentleman " (q.v.) in various secondary 
uses, partly by the prevalent confusion between una gentry. 
nobility and peerage. But that they are the same 
is proved by the use of the French word gentilhomme, a word 
which has pretty well passed out of modern use, but which, 
as long as it remained in use, never lost its true meaning. There 
were very wide distinctions within the French noblesse, but 
they all formed one privileged class as distinguished from the 
roturier. Here, then, is a nobility in the strictest sense. If 
there is no such class in England, it is simply because the class 
which answers to it has never been able" to keep any universally 
acknowledged privileges. The word " gentleman " has lost its 
original meaning in a variety of other uses, while the word 
" nobleman " has come to be confined to members of the peerage 
and a few of their immediate descendants. 

That the English peerage does not answer to the true idea 
of a nobility will be seen with a very little thought. There is no 
handing on of privilege or pre-eminence to perpetual generations. 
The peer holds a great position, endowed with substantial powers 
and privileges, and those powers and privileges are handed on by 
hereditary succession. But they are handed on only to one 
member of the family at a time. The peer's children, in some 
cases his grandchildren, have titles and precedence, but they 
have no substantial privileges. His remoter descendants have 
no advantage of any kind over other people, except their chance 
of succeeding to the peerage. The remote descendant of a duke, 
even though he may chance to be heir presumptive to the duke- 
dom, is in no way distinguished from any other gentleman; 
it is even possible that he may not hold the social rank of gentle- 
man. This is not nobility in the true sense; it is not nobility as 
nobility was understood either in the French kingdom or in the 
Venetian commonwealth. 

Nobility thus implies the vesting of some hereditary privilege 
or advantage in certain families, without deciding in what such 
privilege or advantage consists. Its nature may differ widely 
according to the causes which have led to the establishment 
of the distinction between family and family in each particular 
case. 

The way in which nobility has arisen in different times and 
places is very various, and there are several nations whose 
history will supply us with examples of a nobility 
of one kind giving way to a nobility of another kind. pSpulus. 
The history of the Roman commonwealth illustrates 
this perhaps better than any other. 1 What we may call the 
nobility of earlier occupation makes way for the nobility of 
office. Our first glimpses of authentic Roman history set before 
us two orders in the same state, one of which is distinguished 
from the other by many exclusive privileges. The privileged 

	1 For the ethnological problems raised by the relations of populus 
	and plebs, see Rome: History, § 1.; also Patricians. 

order — the populus, patres, patricians — has all the characteristics 
which we commonly expect to find in a privileged order. It is a 
minority, a minority strictly marked out by birth from other 
members of the commonwealth, a minority which seems further, 
though this point is less clearly marked, to have had on the whole 
the advantage in point of wealth. When we are first entitled 
to speak with any kind of certainty, the non-privileged class 
possess a certain share in the election of magistrates and the 
making of laws. But the privileged class alone are eligible to the 
greatest offices of the state; they have in their hands the ex- 
clusive control of the national religion; they have the exclusive 
enjoyment of the common land of the state — in Teutonic phrase, 
the folkland. A little research shows that the origin of these 
privileges was a very simple one. Those who appear in later times 
as a privileged order among the people had once been the whole 
people. The patricians, patres, housefathers, goodmen — so 
lowly is the origin of that proud name — were once the whole 
Roman people, the original inhabitants of the Roman hills. They 
were the true populus Romanus, alongside of whom grew up 
a secondary Roman people, the plebs or commons. As new 
settlers came, as the people of conquered towns were moved to 
Rome, as the character of Romans was granted to some allies 
and forced upon some enemies, this plebs, sharing some but not all 
of the rights of citizens, became a non-privileged order alongside 
of a privileged order. As the non-privileged order increased in 
numbers, while the privileged order, as every exclusive hereditary 
body must do, lessened, the larger body gradually put on the 
character of the nation at large, while the smaller body put 
on the character of a nobility. But their position as a nobility 
or privileged class arose solely because a class with inferior rights 
to their own grew up around them. They were not a nobility 
or a privileged class as long as there was no less privileged class 
to distinguish them from. Their exclusive possession of power 
made the commonwealth in which they bore rule an aristocracy; 
but they were a democracy among themselves. We see indeed 
faint traces of distinction among the patricians themselves, 
which may lead us to guess that the equality of all patricians may 
have been won by struggles of unrecorded days, not unlike those 
which in recorded days brought about the equality of patrician 
and plebeian. But at this we can only guess. The Roman 
patricians, the true Roman populus, appear at our first sight of 
them as a body democratic in its own constitution, but standing 
out as an order marked by very substantial privileges indeed 
from the other body, the plebs, also democratic in its own con- 
stitution, but in every point of honour and power the marked 
inferior of the populus. 

The old people of Rome thus grew, or rather shrank up, into a 
nobility by the growth of a new people by their side which they 
P trl declined to admit to a share in their rights, powers 
and possessions. A series of struggles raised this 
new people, the plebs, to a level with the old people, the 
populus. The gradual character of the process is not the least 
instructive part of it. There are two marked stages in the 
struggle. In the first the plebeians strive to obtain relief from 
laws and customs which were actually oppressive to them, while 
they were profitable to the patricians. When this relief has been 
gained by a series of enactments, a second struggle follows, in 
which the plebeians win political equality with the patricians. 
In this second struggle, too, the ground is won bit by bit. No 
general law was ever passed to abolish the privileges of the 
patricians; still less was any law ever passed to abolish the dis- 
tinction between patrician and plebeian. All that was done was 
done step by step. First, marriage between the two orders was 
legalized. Then one law admitted plebeians to one office, another 
law to another. Admission to military command was won first, 
then admission to civil jurisdiction; a share in religious functions 
was won last of all. And some offices, chiefly those religious 
offices which carried no political power with them, always 
remained the exclusive property of the patricians, because no 
special law was ever passed to throw them open to plebeians. 
In this gradual way every practical advantage on the part of the 
patricians was taken away. But the result did not lead to the 
abolition of all distinctions between the orders. Patricians and 
plebeians went on as orders defined by law, till the distinction 
died out in the confusion of things under the empire, till at last 
the word " patrician " took quite a new meaning. The distinc- 
tion, in truth, went on till the advantage turned to the side of 
the plebeians. Both consuls might be plebeians, both could not 
be patricians; a patrician could not wield the great powers vested 
in the tribunes of the commons. These were greater advantages 
than the exclusive patrician possession of the offices of interrex, 
rex sacrorum and the higher flamens. And, as the old distinction 
survived in law and religion after all substantial privileges were 
abolished, so presently a new distinction arose of which law 
and religion knew nothing, but which became in practice nearly 
as marked and quite as important as the older one. 

This was the growth of the new nobility of Rome, that body, 
partly patrician, partly plebeian, to whom the name nobUitas 
strictly belongs in Roman history. This new nobility gradually 
became as well marked and as exclusive as the old patriciate. 
But if differed from the old patriciate in this, that, while the 
privileges of the old patriciate rested on law, or perhaps rather 
on immemorial custom, the privileges of the new nobility 
rested wholly on a sentiment of which men could remember 
the beginning. Or it would be more accurate to say that the new 
nobility had really no privileges at all. Its members had no 
legal advantages over other citizens. They were a social caste, 
which strove to keep, and which largely succeeded in keeping, 
all high offices and political power in its own hands. Such 
privileges, even of an honorary kind, as the nobles did enjoy 
by law belonged to them, not as nobles, but as senators and 
senators' sons. Yet practically the new nobility was a privileged 
class; it felt itself to be so, and it was felt to be so by others. 
This nobility consisted of all those who, as descendants of curule 
magistrates, had the jus imaginum — that is, who could point 
to forefathers ennobled by office. That is to say, it consisted 
of the remains of the old patriciate, together with those plebeian 
families any members of which had been chosen to curule 
offices. These were naturally those families which had been 
patrician in some other Italian city, but which were plebeian 
at Rome. Many of them equalled the patricians in wealth 
and antiquity of descent, and as soon as inter-marriage was 
allowed they became in all things their social equals. The 
practical result of the Licinian reform was that the great plebeian' 
families became, for all practical purposes, patrician. They 
separated themselves from the mass of the plebeians to form 
a single body with the surviving patricians. Just as the old 
patricians had striven to keep plebeians out of high offices, 
so now the new nobles, patrician and plebeian alike, strove to 
keep " new men," men who had not the jus imaginum, out of 
high office. But there was still the difference that in the old 
state of things the plebeian was shut out by law, while in the 
new state of things no law shut out the new man. It needed 
a change in the constitution to give the consulship to Lucius 
Sextius; it needed only union and energy in the electors to 
give it to Gaius Marius. 

The Roman case is often misunderstood, because the later 
Roman writers did not fully understand the case themselves. 
Livy could never get rid of the icfea that the old struggle between 
patrician and plebeian was something like the struggle between 
the nobility and the 'people at large in the later days of the 
commonwealth. In a certain sense he knew better; at any rate, 
he often repeats the words of those who knew better; but the 
general impression given by his story is that the plebeians were 
a low mob and their leaders factious and interested ringleaders 
of a mob. The case is again often misunderstood because the 
words " patrician " and " plebeian," like so many other technical 
Roman and Greek words, have come in modern language to 
be used in a way quite unlike their original sense. The word 
" plebeian," in its strict sense, is no more contemptuous than 
the word commoner in England. ' The plebs, like the English 
commons, contained families differing widely in rank and social 
position, among them those families which, as soon as an artificial 
barrier broke down, joined with the patricians to form' the new 
nobility. The whole lesson is lost if the words " patrician " 
and " plebeian " are used in any but their strict sense. The 
Catuli and Metelli, among the proudest nobles of Rome, were 
plebeians, and as such could not have been chosen to the purely 
patrician office of interrex, or flamen of Jupiter. Yet even in 
good writers on Roman history the words " patrician " and 
" plebeian " are often misapplied by being transferred to the 
later disputes at Rome, in which they are quite out of place. 

We may now compare the history of nobility at Rome with 
its history in some other of the most famous city-commonwealths. 

Thus at Athens ! its history is in its main outlines 
partson verv mucn tne same as its history at Rome up to a 
between certain point, while there is nothing at Athens which 
Roman and a t all answers to the later course of things at Rome. 
AoMrjtffe* ^ t Athens, as at Rome, an old patriciate, a nobility of 
older settlement, a nobility which had once been the 
whole people, was gradually shorn of aD exclusive privilege, 
and driven to share equal rights with a new people which 
had grown up around it. The reform of Cleistbenes (q.v.) 
answers in a general way to the reform of Licinius, though the 
different circumstances of the two cities hinder us from carrying 
out the parallel into detail. But both at Rome and at Athens 
we see, at a stage earlier than the final reform, an attempt 
to set up a standard of wealth, either instead of or alongside 
of the older standard of birth. This same general idea comes* 
out both- in the constitution of Servius and in the constitution 
of Solon, though the application of the principle is different 
in the two cases. Servius made voting power depend on income; 
by Solon the same rule was applied to qualification for office. 
By this change power is not granted to every citizen, but it is 
put within the reach of every citizen. No man can change his 
forefathers, but the poor man may haply become richer. The 
Athenian cfararpISai, who were thus gradually brought down 
from their privileged position, seem to have been quite as proud 
and exclusive as the Roman patricians; but when they lost 
their privileges they lost them far more thoroughly, and they 
did not, as at Rome, practically hand on many of them to a new 
nobility, of which they formed part, though not the whole. 
While at Rome the distinction of patrician and plebeian was never 
wiped out, while it remained to the last a legal distinction even 
when practical privilege bad turned the other way, at Athens, 
after the democracy had reached its full growth, the distinction 
seems to have had no legal existence whatever. At Rome 
down to the last it made a difference whether the candidate for 
office was patrician or plebeian, though the difference was in 
later times commonly to the advantage of the plebeian. At 
Athens, at any rate after Aristides, the eupatrid was neither 
better nor worse off than another man. 

But, what is of far greater importance, there never arose at 
Athens any body of men which at all answered to the nobilitas of 
Rome. We see at Athens strong signs of social distinctions, 
even at a late period of the democracy; we see that, though 
the people might be led by the low-born demagogue — using that 
word in its strict and not necessarily dishonourable meaning — 
their votes most commonly fell on men of ancient descent. 
We see that men of birth and wealth often allowed themselves 
a strange licence in dealing with their low-born fellow-citizens. 
But we see no sign of the growth of a body made up of patricians 
and leading plebeians who contrived to keep office to themselves 
by a social tradition only less strong than positive law. We 
have at Athens the exact parallel to the state of things when 
Appius Claudius shrank from the thought of the consulship of 
Gaius Licinius; we have no exact parallel to the state of things 
when Quintus Metellus shrank from the thought of the consulship 
of Gaius Marius. The cause of the difference seems to be that, 
while the origin of the patriciate was exactly the same at Rome 
and at Athens, the origin of the commons was different. The 
four Ionic tribes at Athens seem to have answered very closely 
to the three patrician tribes at Rome; but the Athenian demos 
grew up in a different way from the Roman plebs. If we could 
believe that the Athenian demos arose out of the union of the 

	1 See further Athens: History, and EuPATRinAE. 

other Attic towns with Athens, this would be" an exact analogy 
to the origin of the Roman plebs; the cwrarptSai would be the 
Athenians and the demos the Atticans ('Arrucot). But from 
such glimpses of early Attic history as we can get the union of 
the Attic towns would seem to have been completed before the 
constitutional struggle began. That union would answer rather 
to the union of the three patrician tribes of Rome. Such hints 
as we have, while they set before us, just as at Rome, a state 
of things in which small landed proprietors are burthened with 
debt, also set before us the Attic demos as, largely at least, a 
body of various origins which had grown up in the city. Cleis- 
thenes, for instance, enfranchised many slaves and strangers, 
a course which certainly formed no part of the platform of 
Licinius, and which reminds us rather of Gnaeus Flavius some- 
what later. On the whole it seems most likely that, while the 
kernel of the Roman plebs was rural or belonged to the small 
towns admitted to the Roman franchise, the Attic demos, largely at 
least, though doubtless not wholly, arose out of the mixed settlers 
who had come together in the city, answering to the /zeroi/coi of 
later times. If so, there would be no place in Athens for those great 
plebeian houses, once patrician in some other commonwealth, 
out of which the later Roman nobilitas was so largely formed. 

Thus the history of nobility at Athens supplies a close analogy 
to the earlier stages of its history at Rome, but it has nothing 
answering to its later stages. At Sparta we have a third instance 
of a people shrinking up into a nobility, but it is a people whose 
position differs altogether from anything either at Rome or at 
Athens. Sparta is the best case of a nobility of conquest. This 
is true, whether we look on the Trepioucoi as Achaeans or as Dorians, 
or as belonging some to one race and some to the other (see 
Perioeci). In any case the Spartans form a ruling body, and a 
body whose privileged position in the land is owing to conquest. 
The Spartans answer to the patricians, the irepioucot, to the 
plebs; the helots are below the position of plebs or demos. The 
only difference is that, probably owing to the fact that the 
distinction was due to conquest, the local character of the dis- 
tinction lived on much longer than it did at Rome. We hardly 
look on the Spartans as a nobility among the other Lacedae- 
monians; Sparta rather is a ruling city bearing sway over the 
other Lacedaemonian towns. But this is exactly what the original 
Roman patricians, the settlers on the three oldest hills, were in the 
beginning. The so-called cities (it6\€ls) of the ireploucoi answered 
pretty well to the local plebeian tribes; the difference is that the 
-KtploiKoi never became a united corporate body like the Roman 
plebs. Sparta to the last remained what Rome was at the 
beginning, a city with a populus (StJjlios) but no plebs. And, as 
at Rome in early times, there were at Sparta distinctions within 
the populus; there were Sjiotoc and vropdovts, like the majores 
and minores gentes at Rome. Only at Rome, where there was a 
plebs to be striven against, these distinctions seem to have had a 
tendency to die out, while at Sparta they seem to have had a 
tendency to widen. The Spartan patriciate could afford to 
disfranchise some of its own members. 

The other old Greek cities, as well as those of medieval Italy 
and Germany, would supply us with endless examples of the 
various ways in which privileged orders arose. Venice, a city 
not exactly belonging to any of these classes, essentially a city 
of the Eastern empire and not of the Western, gives us an example 
than which none is more instructive. The renowned patriciate 
of Venice was as far removed as might be from the character either 
of a nobility of conquest or of a nobility of older settlement. 
Nor was it strictly a nobility of office, though it had more in 
common with that than with either of the other two. As Athens 
supplies us with a parallel to the older nobility of Rome without 
any parallel to the later, so Venice supplies us with a parallel to 
the later nobility of Rome without any parallel to the earlier. 
Athens has Fabii and Claudii, but no Catuli or Metelli; Venice 
has Catuli and Metelli, but no Fabii or Claudii. 

In one point, however, the Venetian nobility differed from 
either the older or the newer nobility of Rome, and also from the 
older nobilities of the medieval Italian cities. Nowhere else did 
nobility so distinctly rise out of wealth, and that wealth gained 
by commerce. In the original island territory of Venice there 
could be no such thing as landed property. The agricultural 
plebeian of old Rome and the feudal noble of contemporary 
Europe were both of them at Venice impossible characters. The 
Venetian nobility is an example of a nobility which gradually 
arose out of the mass of the people as certain families step by 
step drew all political power into their own hands. The piths 
did not gather round the patres, neither were they conquered by 
the patres; the patres were developed by natural selection 
out of the plebs, or, more strictly, out of the ancient popidus. 
The commune of Venice, the ancient style of the common- 
wealth, changed into the seigniory of Venice. Political power 
was gradually confined to those whose forefathers had held 
political power. This was what the later nobility of Rome 
was always striving at, and what they did to a great extent 
practically establish. But, .as the exclusive privileges of the 
nobility were never recognized by any legal or formal act, men 
like Gaius Marius would ever and anon thrust themselves in. 
The privileges which the Venetian nobility took to themselves 
were established by acts which, if not legal, were at least formal. 
The Roman nobility, resting wholly on sufferance, was over- 
thrown by the ambition of one of its own members. The Venetian 
nohility, resting also in its beginnings on sufferance, but on 
sufferance which silently obtained the force of law, lasted as long 
as Venice remained a separate state. 

The hereditary oligarchy of Venice was established by a series 
of changes which took place between the years 1297 and 1319. 
All of tbem together really go to make up the " Shutting of the 
Great Council," a name which is formally given to the act of the 
first of those years. In 1172 the Great Council began as an 
elective body; it gradually ousted the popular assembly from all 
practical power. It was, as might be looked for, commonly filled 
by members of distinguished families, descendants of ancient 
magistrates, who were already beginning to be looked on as noble. 
The series of revolutions already spoken of first made descent 
from former councillors a necessary qualification for election 
to the council; then election was abolished, and the council 
consisted of all descendants of its existing members who had 
reached the age of twenty-five. Thus the optimates of Venice 
did what the optimates of Rome strove to do: they established 
a nobility whose one qualification was descent from those who 
had held office in past times. This is what the nobility of office, 
if left unchecked, naturally grows into. But the particular way 
in which oligarchy was finally established at Venice had some 
singular results. Some of the great families which were already 
looked on as noble were not represented in the council at the 
time of the shutting; of others some branches were represented 
and others not. These families and branches of families, however 
noble they might be in descent, were thus shut out from all the 
political privileges of nobility. When one branch of 
CurlaeTnd a family was admitted and one shut out we have an 
the Great analogy to the patrician and plebeian Claudii, though 
Council of the distinction had come about in quite another way. 
Venice. And - n the Q reat Council itself we have the lively 
image of the aristocratic popular assembly of Rome, the 
assembly of the popidus, that of the curiae, where every 
man of patrician birth had his place. The two institutions are 
the same, only the way in which they came about is exactly 
opposite. The assembly of curiae at Rome, originally the 
democratic assembly of the original people, first grew into an 
aristocratic assembly, and then died out altogether as a new 
Roman people, with its own assembly, grew up by its side. 
It was a primitive institution which gradually changed its 
character by force of circumstances. It died out, supplanted 
by other and newer powers, when it became altogether unsuited 
to the times. The Great Council of Venice was anything but a 
primitive institution; it was the artificial institution of a late 
age, which grew at the expense of earlier institutions, of the 
prince on the one side and of the people on the other. But the 
two different roads led to the same result. The Great Council of 
Venice, the curiae of Rome, were each of them the assembly of 
a privileged class, an assembly in which every member of that class 
had a right to a place, an assembly which might be called popular 
as far as the privileged class was concerned, though rigidly 
oligarchic as regarded the excluded classes. But, close as the 
likeness is, it is merely a superficial likeness, because it is the 
result of opposite causes working in opposite directions. It is like 
two men who are both for a moment in the same place, though 
their faces are turned in opposite ways. If the later nobilitas 
of Rome had established an assembly in which every one who had 
the jus imaginum had a vote and none other, that would have 
been a real parallel to the shutting of the Venetian Great Council; 
for it would have come about through the working of causes 
which are essentially the same. 

The nobility which was thus formed at Venice is the very 
model of a civic nobility, a nobility which is also an aristocracy. 
In a monarchy, despotic or constitutional, there -. 
cannot in strictness be an aristocracy, because the Mobility of 
whole political power cannot be vested in the noble Venice 
class. But in the Venetian commonwealth the nobility *** «***<»- 
was a real aristocracy. All political power was vested mcy * 
in the noble class; the prince sank to a magistrate, keeping 
only some of the outward forms of sovereignty; the mass of 
the people were shut out altogether. And, if no government 
on earth ever fully carried out the literal meaning of aristocracy 
as the rule of the best, these civic nobilities come nearer to it 
than any other form of government. They do really seem to 
engender a kind of hereditary capacity in their members. Less 
favourable than either monarchy or democracy to the growth 
of occasional great men, they are more favourable than either 
to the constant supply of a succession of able men, qualified 
to carry on the work of government. Their weak point lies in 
their necessary conservatism; they cannot advance and adapt 
themselves to changed circumstances, as either monarchy or 
democracy can. When, therefore, their goodness is gone, their 
corruption becomes worse than the corruption of either of the 
other forms of government. 

All this is signally shown in the history both of Venice and of 
other aristocratic cities. But we are concerned with them now 
only as instances of one form of nobility. The civic 
aristocracies did not all arise in the same way. Venice ^|J* 
is the best type of one way in which they rose; but cr*cies. 
it is by no means the only way. In not a few of the 
Italian cities nobility had an origin and ran a course quite unlike 
the origin and the course which were its lot at Venice. The 
nobles of many cities were simply the nobles of the surrounding 
country changed, sometimes greatly against their will, into 
citizens. Such a nobility differed far more widely from either 
the Roman or the Venetian patriciate than they differed from 
one another. It wanted the element of legality, or at least of 
formality, which distinguished both these bodies. The privileges 
of the Roman patriciate, whatever we may call them, were 
not usurpations; and, if we call the privileges of the Venetian 
nobility usurpations, they were stealthy and peaceful usurpa- 
tions, founded on something other than mere violence. But in 
many Italian cities the position of the nobles, if it did not begin 
in violence, was maintained by violence, and was often over- 
thrown by violence. They remained, in short, as unruly and 
isolated within the walls of the cities as they had ever been 
without. A nobility of this kind often gave way to a democracy 
which either proved as turbulent as itself, or else grew into an 
oligarchy ruling under democratic forms. Thus at Florence 
the old nobles became the opposite to a privileged class. The 
process which at Rome gradually gave the plebeian a political 
advantage over the patrician was carried at Florence to a far 
greater length at a single blow. The whole noble order was 
disfranchised; to be noble was equivalent to being shut out 
from public office. But something like a new nobility presently 
grew up among the commons themselves; there were popolani 
grossi at Florence just as there were noble plebeians at Rome. 
Only the Roman commons, great and small, never shut out the 
patricians from office; they were satisfied to share office with 
them. In short, the shutting out of the old nobility was, if 
not the formation of a new nobility, at least the formation of a 

	Rural nobility. 

new privileged class. For a certain class of citizens to be con- 
demned, by virtue of their birth, to political disfranchisement 
is as flatly against every principle of democracy as for a certain 
class of citizens to enjoy exclusive rights by reason of birth. 
The Florentine democracy was, in truth, rather to be called an 
oligarchy, if we accept the best definition of democracy (see 
Thucydides vi. 39), namely, that it is the rule of the whole, 
while oligarchy is the rule of a part only. 

It is in these aristocractic cities, of which Venice was the most 
fully developed model, that we can best see what nobility 
really is. It is in these only that we can see nobility in its purest 
form — nobility to which no man can rise and from which no 
man can come down except by the will of the noble class itself. 
In a monarchy, where the king can ennoble, this ideal cannot 
be kept. Nor could it be kept in the later nobility of Rome. 
The new man had much to strive against, but he could some- 
times thrust himself through, and when he did his descendants 
had their j ms imaginum. But at Venice neither prince nor people 
could open the door of the Great Council; only the Great Council 
itself could do that. That in the better times of the aristocracy 
nobility was not uncommonly granted to worthy persons, that in 
its worse times it was more commonly sold to unworthy persons, 
was the affair of the aristocratic body itself. That body, at 
all events, could not be degraded save by its own act. But these 
grants and sales led to distinctions within the ranks of the noble 
order, like those of which we get faint glimpses among the 
Roman patricians. The ducal dignity rarely passed out of a 
circle of specially old and distinguished families. But this has 
often been the case with the high magistracies of commonwealths 
whose constitutions were purely democratic. 

From this purest type of nobility, as seen in the aristocratic 
commonwealths, we may pass to nobility as seen in states of 
greater extent — that is, for the most part in monarchies. 
There are two marked differences between the two. 

They are differences which seem to be inherent 
in the difference between a republic and a monarchy, but 
which it would be truer to say are inherent in the difference 
between a body of men packed close together within the walls 
of a city and a body of men — if we can call them a body — 
scattered over a wide territory. The member of a civic nobility 
is more than a member of an order; he is a member of a corpora- 
tion; he has no powers, he has hardly any being, apart from 
the body of which he is a member. He has a vote in making 
the laws or in choosing those who make them; but when they 
are made he is, if anything, more strictly bound by them than 
the citizen of the non-privileged order. To be a fraction of the 
corporate sovereign, if it had its gains, had also its disadvantages; 
the Venetian noble was fettered by burthens, restrictions and 
suspicions from which the Venetian citizen was free. The noble 
of the large country, on the other hand, the rural noble, as he 
commonly will be, is a member of an order, but he is hardly 
a member of a corporation; he is isolated; he acts apart from 
the rest of the body and wins powers for himself apart from the 
rest of the body. He shows a tendency — a tendency whose 
growth will be more or less checked according to the strength 
of the central power — to grow into something of a lord or even 
a prince on his own account, a growth which may advance to 
the scale of a German elector or stop at that of an English lord 
of a manor. Now many of these tendencies were carried into 
those Italian cities where the civic nobility was a half-tamed 
country nobility; but they have no place in the true civic 
aristocracies. Let us take one typical example. In many 
parts of western Europe the right of private war long remained 
the privilege of every noble, as it had once been the privilege 
of every freeman. And in some Italian cities, the right, or at 
least the privilege, of private war was continued within the city 
walls. But no power of imagination can conceive an acknow- 
ledged right of private war in Rome, Venice or Bern. 

The other point of difference is that, whatever we take for 
the origin and the definition of nobility, in most countries it 
became something that could be given from outside, without 
the need of any consent on the part of the noble class itself. 

In other words, the king or other prince can ennoble. We have 
seen how much this takes away from the true notion of nobility 
as understood in the aristocratic commonwealths. The nobility 
is no longer all-powerful; it may be constrained to admit within 
its own body members for whose presence it has no wish. Where 
this power exists the nobility is no longer in any strictness an 
aristocracy; it may have great privileges, great influence, even 
great legal powers, but it is not the real ruling body, like the true 
aristocracy of Venice. 

In the modern states of western Europe the existing nobility 
seems to have for the most part had its origin in personal service 
to the prince. And this nobility by personal service Mobilities 
seems commonly to have supplanted an older nobility, ij early 
the origin of which was, in some cases at least, strictly Western 
immemorial. In this way the later nobility of the Eur0DC ' 
thegns was in England substituted for the older nobility 
of the eorls. Now the analogy between this change and the 
change from the Roman patriciate to the later Roman 
nobilitos is obvious. In both cases the older nobility gives way 
to a newer; and in both cases the newer nobility was a nobility 
of office. Under a kingly government office bestowed by the 
sovereign holds the same place which office bestowed by the 
people holds in a popular government. This new nobility of 
office supplanted, or perhaps rather absorbed, the older nobility, 
just as the later nobihtas of Rome supplanted or absorbed the 
old patriciate. In our first glimpse of Teutonic institutions, as 
given us by Tacitus, this older nobility appears as strictly 
immemorial (see Waitz, Deutsche Verfassungsgeschickte, i. 185 sq.), 
and its immemorial character appears also in the well-known 
legend in the Rigsmal-saga of the separate creation of jarl, karl 
and thrall. These represent the three classes of mankind 
according to old Teutonic ideas — the noble, the simple freeman 
and the bondman. The kingly house, where there is one, is not 
a distinct class; it is simply the noblest of the noble. For, 
as almost everywhere else, this Teutonic nobility admits of 
degrees, though it is yet harder to say in what the degrees of 
nobility consisted than to say in what nobility consisted itself. 
The older nobility is independent of the possession of land; 
it is independent of office about the sovereign; it is hard to say 
what were the powers and privileges attached to it; but of its 
existence there is no doubt. But in no part of Europe can the 
existing nobility trace itself to this immemorial nobility of 
primitive days; the nobility of medieval and modern days 
springs from the later nobility of office. The nobles of modern 
Europe are rather thegnas than eorlas. The eorl of the old system 
would doubtless commonly become a thegn under the new, as 
the Roman patrician took his place in the new nobilitas; but 
others could take their place there also. The Old-English laws 
point out ways by which the churl might rise to thegn's rank, 
and in the centuries during which the change went on we find 
mention — complaining mention — both in England and elsewhere, 
at the court of Charles the Simple and at the court of ^Ethelred, of 
the rise of new men to posts of authority. The story that Earl 
Godwine himself was of churlish birth, whether true or false, 
marks the possibility of such a rise. A still wilder tale spoke 
of Hugh Capet as the son of a butcher of Paris. Stories like 
these prove even more than the real rise of Hagano and Eadric. 

In England the nobility of the thegns was to a great extent 
personally displaced, so to speak, by the results of the Norman 
Conquest. But the idea of nobility did not greatly 
change. The English thegn sometimes yielded to, 

	England* 

sometimes changed into, the Norman baron, using that word 
in its widest sense, without any violent alteration in his position. 
The notion of holding land of the king became more prominent 
than the notion of personal service done to the king; but, as 
the land was held by the tenure of personal service, the actual 
relation hardly changed. But the connexion between nobility 
and the holding of land comes out in the practice by which the 
lord so constantly took the name of his lordship. It is in this 
way that the prefixes de and von, descriptions in themselves 
essentially local, have become in other lands badges of nobility. 
This notion has died out in England by the dropping of the 
preposition; btit it long lived on wherever Latin or French 
was used. And before long nobility won for itself a distinguishing 
outward badge. The device of hereditary coat-armour, a growth 
of the 1 2th century, did much to define and mark out the noble 
class throughout Europe. As it could be acquired by grant of 
the sovereign, and as, when one? acquired, it went on from 
generation to generation, it answers exactly to the jus imaginum 
at Rome, the hereditary badge of nobility conferred by the 
election of the people. Those who possessed the right of coat- 
armour by immemorial use, or by grant in regular form, formed 
the class of nobility or gentry, words which, it must again be 
remembered, are strictly of the same meaning. They held 
whatever privileges or advantages have attached in different 
times and places to the rank of nobility or gentry. In England 
indeed a variety of causes hindered nobility or gentry from ever 
obtaining the importance which they obtained, for instance, 
in France. But perhaps no cause was more important than 
the growth of the peerage. That institution at once set up a 
new standard of nobility, a new form of the nobility of office. 
The peer — in strictness, the peer in his own person only, not 
even his children — became the only noble; the ideas of nobility 
and gentry thus became divorced in a way in which they arc 
not in any other country. Those who would elsewhere have been 
counted as the nobility, the bearers of coat-armour by good 
right, were hindered from forming a class holding any substantial 
privilege. In a word, the growth of the peerage hindered the 
existence in England of any nobility in the continental sense 
of the word. The esquires, knights, lesser barons, even the 
remote descendants of peers, that is, the noblesse of other countries, 
in England remained gentlemen, but not noblemen — simple 
commoners, that is, without legal advantage over their fellow- 
commoners who had no jus imaginum to boast of. There can 
be no doubt that the class in England which answers to the 
noblesse of other lands is the class that bears coat-armour, the 
gentry strictly so called. 1 Had they been able to establish and 
to maintain any kind of privilege, even that of mere honorary 
precedence, they would exactly answer to continental nobility. 
That coat-armour has been lavishly granted and often assumed 
without right, that the word " gentleman " has acquired various 
secondary senses, proves nothing; that is the natural result 
of a state of things in which the slatus of gentry carries with it 
no legal advantage, and yet is eagerly sought* after on social 
grounds. If coat-armour, and thereby the rank of gentry, has 
been lavishly granted, some may think that the rank of peerage 
has often been lavishly granted also. In short, there is no real 
nobility in England; for the class which answers to foreign 
nobility has so long ceased to have any practical privileges that 
it has long ceased to be looked on as a nobility, and the word 
nobility has been transferred to another class which has nothing 
answering to it out of the three Britfsh kingdoms. 2 This last 

	1 This statement is mainly interesting as expressing the late 
	Professor Freeman's view; it is, however, open to serious criticism. 
	Coat-armour was in itself not necessarily a badge of nobility at all ; 
	it could be, and was, worn by people having no pretensions to be 
	" gentlemen," and this is true both of England and the continent. 
	In its origin it was a mere personal mark of distinction, in the 
	primary sense of this word. No " grant " was necessary; it was 
	assumed by all and sundry who had occasion to use it, though a 
	reasonable convention forbade one man to assume the device of 
	another. Later arose the custom of granting arms as a mark of 
	personal favour or gratitude. This again was not at the outset an 
	exclusive right of the crown; it was common for a leaderin battle 
	to grant to some one not of his family, who had specially distinguished 
	himself, the right to bear the whole or part of his coat of arms, 
	differenced or undifferenced. On the other hand, many undoubted 
	" gentlemen " never assumed arms at all. The claim of the heralds 
	to make " gentry " depend on the bearing of coat-armour, and the 
	right to this depend on grant or recognition by themselves as officers 
	of the crown, is of comparatively late growth. See further the article 
	Gentleman. — W. A. P. 

	1 Compare e.g. the social conditions of Great Britain and Germany. 
	In Germany there are two classes of nobility: (i) the koker Add, 
	members of the mediatized, formerly sovereign families, who rank 
	as the equals in blood (ebenburtig) of the royal houses of Europe; 
	(2) the niederer Adel, to which every one having the nobiliary prefix 
	von belongs. In England " presentation at court " is the privilege 
	of no particular class as such; and the wives of ministers of the 

	France, 
	Poland, 

	class in strictness takes in only the peers personally; at the 
	outside it cannot be stretched beyond those of their children 
	and grandchildren who bear the courtesy titles of lord and lady. 

No attempt has been here made to trace out the history of 
nobility in the various countries and, we must add, cities of 
Europe. All that has been attempted has been to point 
out some general truths, and to refer to some specially 
striking instances. Once more, it must be borne in mind that, 
while it is essential to the idea of nobility that it should carry 
with it some hereditary privilege, the nature and extent of that 
privilege may vary endlessly. In the 18th century the nobility 
of France and the nobility of Poland alike answered to the very 
strictest definition of nobility; but the political positions of the 
two were as broadly contrasted as the positions of any two 
classes of men could be. The nobility of France, keeping the 
most oppressive social and personal privileges, had been shorn 
of all political and even administrative power; the tyrants 
of the people were the slaves of the king. In Poland 
sixty thousand gentlemen, rich and poor, famous and 
obscure, but all alike gentlemen, rode out to choose a king by a 
unanimous vote, and to bind him when chosen by such conditions 
as they thought good. Those sixty thousand, like the populus 
of Rome, formed a narrow oligarchy as regarded the rest of the 
nation, but a wild democracy among themselves. Poland, in 
short, came nearer than any kingdom or country of large extent 
to the nature of an aristocracy, as we have seen aristocracy in 
the aristocratic cities. The chief power of the state was placed 
neither in the prince nor in the nation at large; it was held by* a 
noble class. The kingly power in Poland, like the ducal power 
at Venice, had been so narrowed that Poland, though she still 
kept a king, called herself a republic no less than Venice. And 
whatever was taken from the king went to the gain of the noble 
order. But the nobility of a large country, even though used to 
act politically as an order, could never put on that orderly and 
legal character which distinguishes the true civic patriciates. 
It never could come so nearly as a civic patriciate could to being 
something like the rule of the best in ,any sense of those words. 

The tendency of modern times has been towards the breaking 
down of formal hereditary privileges. In modern common- 
wealths, above all, they have been thought to be essentially 
inconsistent with republican institutions. The truth of the 
matter is rather that the circumstances of most modern common- 
wealths have been unfavourable to the preservation, and still 
more to the growth, of privileged bodies. Where they existed, 
as in Switzerland, they have been overthrown. Where they did 
not exist, as in America, everything has made it more and more 
impossible that they should arise. And, as modern changes have 
commonly attacked the power both of kings and of nobles, the 
common notion has come that kingship and nobility have some 
necessary connexion. It has seemed as if any form of nobility 
was inconsistent with a republican form of government, while 
nobility, in some shape or other, has come to be looked on as a 
natural, if not a necessary, appendage to a monarchy. And as 
far as regards the social side of kingship this is true. A court 
seems more natural where a chain of degrees leads gradually 
up from the lowest subject to the throne than when all beneath 
the throne are nearly on a level. And from one point of view, 
that from which the kingly house is but the noblest of the noble, 
kingship and nobility are closely allied. But in the more strictly 

	crown, even if of quite humble origin, are " commanded " to court 
	functions with their husbands. The strictness of the principle of 
	admission or exclusion differs at the various German courts, and has 
	tended to be modified by the growth of a new aristocracy of wealth ; 
	but a single instance known to the present writer may serve to 
	illustrate the fundamental divergence of German (a fortiori Austrian) 
	ideas from English in this matt en A wealthy publisher of European 
	reputation attended the court of his native town, the capital of a small 
	grand-duchy, in virtue of the honorary title Hofrat; his wife, not 
	being noble, did not accompany him. His elder daughter married a 
	cabinet minister, but, as he was not a noble, this did not confer on 
	her the^ right to go to court. Hisyounger daughter married a sub- 
	altern in a line regiment, belonging to the lesser nobility; as en- 
	nobled by marriage (according to the liberal rule of this particular 
	court), she was duly " presented." — W. A, P. 

political view monarchy and nobility are strongly opposed. 
Even the modified form of absolute monarchy which has existed 
in some Western countries, while it preserves, perhaps even 
strengthens, the social position of a nobility, destroys its political 
power. Under the fully-developed despotisms of the East a real 
nobility is impossible; the prince raises and thrusts down as he 
pleases. It is only in a commonwealth that a nobility can really 
rule; that is, it is only in a commonwealth 'that the nobility can 
really be an aristocracy. And even in a democratic common- 
wealth the sentiment of nobility may exist, though all legal 
privilege has been abolished or has never existed. That is to 
say, traditional feeling may give the members of certain families 
a strong preference, to say the least, in election to office. We 
have seen that this was the case at Athens; it was largely the 
case in the democratic cantons of Switzerland; indeed the 
nobility of Rome itself, after the privileges of the patricians were 
abolished, rested on no other foundation. (E. A. F.) 

Authorities. — Selden's Titles of Honor (London, 1672) remains 
the best comparative account in the English language of the nobility 
of various countries up to his date. For England see E. P. Shirley, 
Noble and Gentle Men (1 860) ; Gneist, Adel und Ritterschaft in England 
(Berlin, 1853); Sir George Sitwell, "The English Gentleman," in 
the Ancestor (No. 1, April 1902); and J. H. Round's works, passim. 
A. C. Fox-Davies's Armorial Families^ (Edinburgh, 1895, and subse- 
quent editiens) represents an unhistorical attempt to create the idea 
of a noblesse in the United Kingdom. For the origin and growth of 
the nobility in France, see A. Luchaire, Manuel des institutions 
frangaises (Paris, 1892), and P. Guilhiermoz, Essai sur Vorigine de la 
noblesse en France au moyen dge (1902) ; for their later status and 
privileges, A. de Tocqueville, L Ancten Regime et la Revolution (1856 
ff.), and H. A. Taine, Les Origines de la France contemporaine y pt. 1., 
L'Ancien Rigime (1875 ff.). For the German and Austrian nobility, 
see v. Strantz, Gesch. des deutscken Adels (2nd ed., Waldenburg, 
1851); von Maurer, Ober das Wesen des dltesten Adels der deutscken 
*$tamme (Munich, 1846); Rose, Der Adel Deutschlands und seine 
Stellung im deutscken Reich (Berlin, 1883); G. Meyer, Lehrbuch des 
deutscken Staatsrechts (5th ed., Leipzig, 1899)^ and the Gotha 
Genealogische Taschenbucker* For the Italian nobility see the eight 
magnificent folio volumes of Count Pompeo Litta, Celebri famiglie 
italiane, continued by various editors (Milan, 1819-1907); for 
Spanish, Fernandez de Bethencourt, HisL geneal6gica % t. i.-vii. (1897- 
1907). The authoritative manual for the royal nouses and the 
" higher nobility " of Europe is the Almanack de Gotha, published 
yearly. See also the articles Titles of Honour, Peerage, Feudal- 
ism, Gentleman, Duke, Count, &c. 


NOBLE, SIR ANDREW (1832- ), British physicist and 
artillerist, was born at Greenock on the 15th of September 1832, 
and was educated at Edinburgh Academy and at the Royal 
Military Academy, Woolwich. In 1849 he entered the Royal 
Artillery, attaining the rank of captain in 1855, and in 1857 he 
became secretary to the Royal Artillery Institution. About this 
time the question of the supersession of the old smooth-bores by 
rifled guns was coming to the fore, and on the appointment of 
the Select Committee on Rifled Cannon in 1858 to report on the 
matter, he was chosen its secretary, a capacity in which he 
devised an ingenious method for comparing the probable accuracy 
of the shooting attainable with each type of gun. In 1859 he 
was appointed Assistant-Inspector of Artillery, and in the 
following year he became a member of the Ordnance Select 
Committee and of the Committee on Explosives, serving on the 
latter for twenty years, until its dissolution. About the same 
time he was prevailed upon by Sir William, afterwards Lord, 
Armstrong to leave the public service and take up a post at 
Elswick. Here, in the first instance, he was put in charge of 
the ordnance department, but it was not long before his organiz- 
ing and administrative ability and scientific attainments enlarged 
the sphere of his influence, until finally he became chairman of 
the company. Immediately on his appointment he began a 
systematic investigation of the phenomena which occur when a 
gun is fired, some of his first experiments being designed to 
discover with accuracy the pressures attained in the largest 
,guns of that time. About 1862 he invented his chronoscope for 
the measurement of exceedingly small intervals of time, and 
began to apply it in ballistic experiments for ascertaining the 
velocity with which the shot moves along the barrel of a gun 
with different powders and different charges. Then he joined 
Sir Frederick Abel in a classical research on " Fired Gunpowder," 
the experimental work being largely carried on at Elswick, and • 
the conclusions they arrived at had a great effect on the progress 
of gunnery, for they showed how increased muzzle velocities were 
to be attained without increased pressures in the gun. These 
inquiries, in fact, enabled Elswick in 1877 to turn out the 6-in. 
and 8-in. guns, with velocities of over 2000 ft. per second, that 
obliged the British government finally to give up the antiquated 
muzzle-loaders to which it had so obstinately adhered. Later, 
when the era of nitro or " smokeless " powders had begun, 
Captain Noble was an early advocate of their advantages, and 
when at length the British government awoke to the necessity 
of selecting a powder of that character for the naval and military 
services of Great Britain, Elswick extended its hospitality to 
the committee that invented cordite, and gave the members 
facilities, which were not offered by the government, for the 
necessary experimental work. Even after the powder was in- 
vented and the committee dissolved, inquiries — which it was 
nobody's official business to make, and which therefore were not 
made officially — were continued at Elswick to ascertain how by 
suitable modifications in form, composition, &c, cordite might 
the better perform the varied duties required of it. Noble 
became a member of the committee appointed in 1900 by Lord 
Lansdowne to consider, among other things, the excessive erosion 
alleged by some of the powder's critics to be produced by it in 
the barrels of the guns in which it is used. He was made C.B. 
in 1 88 1, promoted to be K.C.B. in 1893, and was created a baronet 
among the Coronation honours in 1902; he was also the recipient 
of many foreign decorations and scientific honours, including a 
Royal medal from the Royal Society in 1880, and the Albert 
medal of the Society of Arts in 1909. He published a number of 
his scientific papers in a collected form as Artillery and Explosives 
in 1906. 


NOBLESVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Hamilton 
county, Indiana, U.S.A., on the White river, about 20 m. N. by 
E. of Indianapolis. Pop. (1890) 3054; (1900) 4792 (226 ne- 
groes); (1910) 5073, It is served by the Lake Erie & Western, 
the Central Indiana and the Indiana Union (electric) Traction 
railways. It is in the natural gas region of the state, and has 
various manufactures. It was settled about 1825 and incor- 
porated as a town in 185 1. 


NOCERA INFERIORE, formerly Nocera dei Pagani (anc. 
Nuceria Alfaterna, g.v.), a town and episcopal see of Campania, 
Italy, in the province of Salerno, at the foot of Monte Albino, 
23 m. E.S.E. of Naples by rail, 135 ft. above sea-level. Pop. 
(1901) 11,933 (town); 20,064 (commune). Nocera is connected 
with Codola on the line from Naples to Avellino by a branch 
railway (3 m.). In the old castle Helena, the widow of Manfred, 
died after the battle of Benevento, and here Urban VI. imprisoned 
the cardinals who favoured the antipope Clement VII. Two 
miles to the E. near the village of Nocera Superiore is the circular 
church of Sta Maria Maggiore, dating from the 4th century. Its 
chief feature is its dome, ceiled with stone internally; but covered 
externally with a false roof. It is supported by 40 ancient 
columns, and in its construction resembles S Stefano Rotondo in 
Rome. The walls are covered with frescoes of the 14th century. 

At an early date the city became an episcopal see, and in the 
1 2th century it sided with Innocent II. against Roger of Sicily, 
and suffered severely for its choice. A colony of Saracens 
introduced by Frederick II. probably gave rise to the epithet 
(" of the pagans ") by which it was so long distinguished, as 
well as to the town of Pagani, which lies about 1 m. to the west. 
In 1385 Pope Urban VI. was besieged in the castle of Charles of 
Durazzo. Nocera was the birthplace of Solimena the painter 
and of Hugo de' Pagani, the founder of the Templars; and in the 
list of its bishops appears the name of Paulus Jovius. 

NOCERA UMBRA (anc. Nuceria Camellarid) y a town and 
episcopal see in the province of Perugia, Italy, 12 m. by rail N. 
by E. of Foligno, 1706 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 5685 
(town), 7848 (commune). It has some old churches, containing 
pictures and frescoes; in the cathedral is a large altarpiece by 
Nicolo Alunno. Three miles to the south-east of the town are 
mineral springs. 


NOCTURN, or Nocturne (Lat. nocturnus, of or belonging to 
the night, nox), in the Roman Church, one of the three divisions 
of the office of matins, corresponding with the vigils, beginning 
at 9 p.m. midnight and 3 a.m. respectively. The service consists 
of psalms, lessons and antiphons (see Breviary). The term 
" nocturne " is applied to a musical composition, answering 
to the earlier " serenade, " of a quiet, dreamy and romantic 
character. The name and style are said to have originated with 
John Field (1782-1837). The best-known compositions of this 
kind are the pianoforte pieces of Chopin. J. McNeill Whistler 
also introduced the term into painting by using the name for some 
of his night-pieces. A " nocturnal " is an instrument for finding 
the hour of the night by observation of the relative positions of 
the pole-star and other stars, generally the pointers of Ursa 
Major. The British Museum contains a fine nocturnal made 
about 1560 by Humfray Cole (see Navigation). 


NODDY, the name applied, originally by sailors, to a sea-bird, 
from its showing so little fear of man as to be accounted stupid. 
It is the Sterna stolida of Linnaeus, and the Anous stolidus of 
modern ornithology, having the figure of a Tern (q.v.), and 
belonging to the sub-family Sterninae, but is heavier in flight, 
with shorter wings and the tail less deeply forked. The plumage is 
of a uniform sooty hue, excepting the crown of the head, which is 
light grey. The Noddy is very generally distributed throughout 
the tropical or nearly tropical oceans, but occasionally wanders 
into colder climates, and has been met with even in the Irish Sea. 
It breeds, often in astounding numbers, on low cays and coral- 
islets, commonly making a shallow nest of sea- weed or small twigs. 
Howard Saunders (Proc. Zool. Society, 1876, pp. 669-672) admits 
four other species of the genus: Anous tenuiroslris, supposed 
to be confined to the southern part of the Indian Ocean, from 
Madagascar to West Australia; A. melanogenys, often con- 
founded with the last, but having nearly as wide a range as the 
first; and A. leucocapillus, hitherto known only from Torres 
Strait and the Southern Pacific. These three have much 
resemblance to A. stolidus, but are smaller in size, and the two 
latter have the crown white instead of grey. The fourth species, 
A. caeruleus (with which he includes the A. cinereus of some 
authors), differs not inconsiderably, being of a dove-colour, 
lighter on the head and darker on the back, the wings bearing a 
narrow white bar, with their quill-feathers blackish-brown, while 
the feet are reddish and the webs yellow. Three more species — 
A. super ciliosus from the Caribbean Sea "and Gulf of Mexico, 
A. plumbeigularis from the Red Sea, and A. galapagensis from 
the Galapagos — have been added by R. Bowdler Sharpe (Philos. 
Transactions, clxviii. pp. 468, 469), according to whom {Proc. 
Z00L Society, 1878, p. 272) A. cinereus of the Eastern Pacific 
is distinct from k. caeruleus of Australia and the Western 
Pacific. (A. N.) 


NODE (Lat. nodus, a loop), in astronomy, one of two opposite 
points at which a heavenly body passes through the principal 
co-ordinate plane to which its motion is referred. In the case of 
the heavenly bodies this plane is commonly that of the ecliptic, 
but, in special cases, the plane through the origin parallel to the 
earth's equator or the plane of a planet's orbit is used. The 
ascending node is that at which the body moves from the south 
or negative towards the north or positive side of the plane. 
The moon's nodes are the points in which its path intercepts the 
plane of the ecliptic. In the geometry of curves, a node is the 
name given to the loop formed by a continuous curve crossing 
itself, the point of crossing is termed a " double point," and at 
it there are two non-coincident tangents to the curve; the 
remaining species of double points, termed " acnode," " spinode " 
or " cusp," admits of two coincident tangents (see Curve). 


NODIER, CHARLES (1780-1844)1 French author, was born 
on the 29th of April 1780 at Besancon. His father, on the out- 
break of the Revolution, was appointed mayor of Besancon and 
consequently chief police magistrate; he seems to have rather 
lent himself as an instrument to the tyranny of the Jacobins 
than to have shared their principles; but his son was for a time 
an ardent citizen, and is said to have been a club member when he 
could at the most have been twelve years old. In 1793 Charles 
saved the life of a lady guilty of sending money to an imigri, 
by declaring to his father that if she were condemned he would 
take his own life. He was sent to Strassburg, where he lived in 
the house of Eulogius Schneider, the notorious Jacobin governor 
of Alsace, but a good Greek scholar. During the Terror his father 
put him under the care of Girod de Chautrans, with whom he 
studied English and German. His love of books began very 
early, and he combined with it a strong interest in natural 
science. He became librarian in his native town, but his exertions 
in the cause of suspected persons brought him under suspicion. 
An inspection of his papers by the police, however, revealed 
nothing more dangerous than a dissertation on the antennae of 
insects. Entomology continued to be a favourite study with him, 
but he varied it with philology and pure literature and even 
political writing. For a skit on Napoleon, in 1803, he was im- 
prisoned for some months. He then quitted Paris, whither he 
had gone after losing his position at Besancon, and for some 
years lived a very unsettled b'fe at Besancon, D61e, where he 
married, and in other places in the Jura. During these wander- 
ings he wrote Le Peintre de Salzbourg, journal des Amotions d'un 
cceur soufrant, suivi des Miditations du clottre (1803). The hero, 
Charles, who is a variation of the Werther type, desires the 
restoration of the monasteries, to afford a refuge from the woes 
of the world. In 181 1 Nodier appears at Laibach as editor of 
a polyglot journal, the Illyrian Telegraph, published in French, 
German, Italian and Slav. On the evacuation of the Illyrian 
provinces he returned to Paris, and the restoration found him a 
royalist, though he retained something of republican sentiment. 
In 1824 he was appointed to the librarianship of the Bibliotheque 
de 1 'Arsenal. He was elected a member of the Academy in 1833, 
and made a member of the Legion of Honour in 1843, a year 
before his death on the 27th of January 1844. These twenty 
years at the arsenal were by far the most important and fruitful of 
Nodier 's life. He had much of the Bohemian in his composition. 
But he had the advantage of a settled home in which to collect 
and study rare books; and he was able to supply a centre and 
rallying place to a knot of young literary men of greater individual 
talent than himself — the so-called Romanticists of 1830 — and 
to colour their tastes and work very decidedly with his own 
predilections. Victor Hugo, Alfred de Musset and Sainte-Beuve 
all acknowledged their obligations to him. He was a passionate 
admirer of Goethe and of Shakespeare, and had himself con- 
tributed to the personal literature that was one of the leading 
traits of the Romantic school. 

His best and most characteristic work, some of which is exquisite 
in its kind, consists partly of short tales of a more or less fantastic 
character, partly of nondescript articles^ half bibliographic, half 
narrative, the nearest analogue to which in English is to be found 
in some of the papers of De Quincey. The best examples of the 
latter are to be found in the volume entitled Melanges tires 'd'une 
petite bibliotheque \ published in 1829 and afterwards continued. 
Of his tales the best are Stnarra, ou les demons de la nuit (1821); 
Trilby, ou le lutin d'Argail (1822); Histoire du roi de Bokime et de 
sss sept chateaux (1830); La Fie aux miettes (1832); Ines de las 
Sierras (1838); Ligende se Sceur Beatrix (1838), together with some 
fairy stories published in the year of his death, and Franciscus 
Columna, which appeared after it. The Souvenirs de jeunesse (1832) 
are interesting but untrustworthy, and the Dictionnaire universe! 
de la langue frangaise (1823), which, in the days before Littre, was 
one of the most useful of its kind, is said to have been not wholly 
or mainly Nodier's. There is a so-called collection of (E'uvres 
completes, in 12 vols. (1832), but at that time much of the author's 
best work had not appeared, and it included but a part of what 
was actually published. Nodier found an indulgent biographer in 
Prosper Merimee on the occasion of the younger man's admission 
to the academy. 

An account of his share in the Romantic movement is to be found 
in Georg Brandes's Main Currents in Nineteenth Century Literature. 
His Description raisonn&e d'une jolie collection de livres (1844), which is 
a catalogue of the books in his library, contains a life by Francis Wey 
and a complete bibliography of his numerous works. See also Saintc- 
Bcuve, Portraits littiraires, vol. ii.; Prosper Merimee, Portraits 
historiques et littiraires (1874); and A. Estignard, Correspondance 
inidite de Charles Nodier, 17QO-1844 (1876), containing his letters to 
Charles Weiss. 


NOEGGERATH, JOHANN JACOB (178S-1877), German 
mineralogist and geologist, was born at Bonn on the 10th of 
October 1788. In 1814-1815 he became commissioner of mines 
for some of the Rhine Provinces, and in 1818 professor of minera- 
logy and afterwards professor of geology, director of the 
Museum of Natural History and chief of the mining department 
in the university at Bonn. He obtained a very fine collection of 
minerals for the museum, was eminently successful as a teacher, 
and achieved a wide reputation among mining engineers. The 
following are his more important publications: Uber aufrecht 
im Gebirgsgestein eingeschlossene fossile Baumstdmme und andere 
VegetabUien (1810-1821); Das Gebirge in BJicinland-Westphalen, 
nach miner alogischem und chemischem Bezuge (4 vols., 1822-1826) ; 
Die Entstehung der Erde (1843); and Der Laacher See und seine 
vulkaniscken Umgebungen (1870). The Carboniferous plant 
Noeggerathia, allied to the Zamias and Cycads, was named after 
him. He died at Bonn on the 13th of September 1877. 


NOEL, RODEN BERKELEY WRIOTHESLEY (1834-1894), 
English poet, son of Noel, Lord Barham, afterwards earl of 
Gainsborough, was born on the 27th of August 1834. He was 
educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated 
M.A. in 1858. He then spent two years travelling in the East. 
He married in 1863 Alice de Broe, daughter of the director of the 
Ottoman Bank in Beirout. The third child of this marriage, 
Eric, who died at the age of five^ is commemorated in Roden 
Noel's best-known book of verse, A Little Child's Monument 
(188 1). His other volumes are Behind the Veil, and other Poems 
(1863), not included in his collected works, Beatrice^ and other 
Poems (1868), The Red Flag (1872), Livingstone in Africa (1874), 
Songs of the Heights and Deeps (1885), A Modern Fausi, and 
other Poems (1888), Poor People 1 s Christmas (1890) and My Sea f 
and other Poems (1896). Roden Noel's versification was unequal 
and sometimes harsh, but he has a genuine feeling for nature, 
and the work is permeated by philosophic thought. The latter 
part of his life was spent at Brighton, but he died at Mainz, 
on the 26th of May 1894. His other works include a drama in 
verse, The House of Ravensburg (1877), a Life of Byron (1890, 
" Great Writers " series), a selection of Thomas Ot way's plays 
(1888) for the " Mermaid " series, and critical papers on Literature 
and philosophy. 

His Collected Poems were edited (1902) by his sister, Victoria 
Buxton, with a notice by J. Addington Symonds, which had origin- 
ally appeared in the Academy (19th of Jan. 1899) as a review of The 
Modern Faust. The selection (1892) in the series of Canterbury Poets 
has an introduction by Robert Buchanan. 


NOETUS, a presbyter of the church of Asia Minor about 
a.d. 230, was a native of Smyrna, where (or perhaps in Ephesus) 
he became a prominent representative of the particular type of 
Christology now called modalistic monarchianism or patri- 
passianism. His views, which led to his excommunication from 
the Asiatic Church, are known chiefly through the writings of 
Hippolytus, his contemporary at Rome, where he settled and had 
a large following. He accepted the fourth Gospel, but regarded 
its statements about the Logos as allegorical. His disciple 
Cleomenes held that God is both invisible and visible; as visible 
He is the Son. 


NOGARET, GUILLAUME DE (d. 1313), councillor and keeper 
of the seal to Philip IV. of France, was born between 1260 and 
1270. His father was a citizen of Toulouse, and was, so it was 
claimed, condemned as a heretic during the Albigensian crusade. 
The family held a small ancestral property of servile origin at 
Nogaret, near Saint Felix de Caramon, from which it took its 
name. In 1291 Guillaume was professor of jurisprudence at the 
university of Montpellier, and in 1296 he became a member of 
the Curia Regis at Paris. His name is mainly connected with the 
quarrel of Philip IV. with Pope Boniface VIII. In 1300 he was 
sent with an embassy to Boniface, of which he has left a pic- 
turesque but highly coloured account. His real ascendancy over 
the king dates from February 1303, when he persuaded Philip 
to consent to the bold plan'of seizing Boniface and bringing him 
forcibly from Italy to a council in France which should depose 
him. On the 7th of March he received, with three others, a 
secret commission from the royal chancery to " go to certain 
places . . . and make such treaties with such persons as seemed 
good to them," On the 12th of March a solemn royal assembly 
was held in the Louvre, at which Guillaume de Nogaret read a 
long series of accusations against Boniface and demanded the 
calling of a general council to try him. Soon afterwards he 
went to Italy. By the aid of a Florentine spy, Nogaret gathered 
a band of adventurers and of enemies of the Gaetani (Boniface's 
family) in the Apennines. The great Colonna house, at bitter feud 
with the Gaetani, was his strongest ally, and Sciarra Colonna 
accompanied Nogaret to Anagni, Boniface's birthplace. On 
the 7th of September, with their band of some sixteen hundred 
men, Nogaret and Colonna surprised the little town. Boniface 
was taken prisoner. Sciarra wished to kill him, but Nogaret 's 
policy was to take him to France and compel him to summon a 
general council. The tide soon turned, however. On the 9th 
a concerted rising of the townsmen in Boniface's favour put 
Nogaret and his allies to flight, and the pope was free. His 
death at Rome on the nth of October saved Nogaret. The 
election of the timid Benedict ^XI. was the beginning of that 
triumph of France which lasted through the Avignon captivity. 
Early in 1304 Nogaret went to Languedoc to report to Philip 
IV., and was rewarded by gifts of land and money. Then he 
was sent back with an embassy to Benedict XI. to demand 
absolution for all concerned in the struggle with Boniface VIII. 
Benedict refused to meet Nogaret, and excepted him from the 
general absolution which he granted on the 13th of May 1304, 
and on the 7th of June issued against him and his associates at 
Anagni the bull Flagitiosum scelus. Nogaret replied by apologies 
for his conduct based upon attacks upon the memory of Boniface, 
and when Benedict died on the 7th of July 1304 he pointed to his 
death as a witness to the justice of his cause. French influence 
was successful in getting a Frenchman, Bertrand de Got (Clement 
V.) elected as Benedict's successor. The threat of proceedings 
against the memory of Boniface was renewed to force Clement 
to absolve Nogaret, and Clement had given way on this point 
when the further question of an inquiry into the condition of the 
Templars was brought forward by Philip as a preliminary to 
their arrest and the seizure of their property in October 1307. 
Nogaret was active in getting the renegade members of the order 
to give evidence against their fellows, and the whole proceedings 
against them bear traces of his unscrupulous and merciless pen. 
Clement's weak and ineffective resistance to this still further 
delayed the agreement between him and Philip. Nogaret had 
become keeper of the seal this year in succession to Pierre de 
Belleperche. His talents as an advocatus diaboli were given still 
further employment in the trial of Guichard, bishop of Troycs, 
charged with various crimes, including witchcraft and incon- 
tinence, which was begun in 1308 and lasted till 13 13. The trial 
was a hint to Clement as to what might happen if the oft repeated 
threat of a trial of Bom face were fulfilled. Absolution was 
obtained from Clement on the 27th of April 13 11. Guillaume de 
Nogaret was to go on the next crusade and visit certain places of 
pilgrimage in France and Spain as a penance, but never did so. 
He died in 13 13 " witfi his tongue horribly thrust out," according 
to the chronicler Jean Desnouelles. He retained the seals till his 
death and was . occupied with the king's affairs concerning 
Flanders as late as the end of March 1313. 

See E. Renan in Histoire littiraire de la France, xxvii. 233; R. 
Holzmann, Wilhelm von Nogaret (Freiburg, 1898). For the sources 
consult Dom Bouquet, Recueil de historiens des Goutes et de la France, 
vols, xx.-xxiii.; Annales regis Edwordi primi in Rishanger (" Rolls " 
series), pp. 483-491, which gives the fullest account of the affair at 
Anagni. 


NOGENT-LE-ROTROU, a town of northern France, formerly 
capital of the district of Perche and now capital of an arrondisse- 
ment in the department of Eure-et-Loir on the Huisne, 38 m. 
W.S.W. of Chartres by rail. Pop. (1906) 6884. In the early 
part of the 17th century the overlordship was acquired by the 
duke of Sully, financial minister of Henry IV. In the courtyard 
of the hospital, originally founded at the end of the 12th century, 
there is a small building containing the tomb of Sully and his 
wife. On the hill overlooking the town stands the chateau of the 
counts of Perche, of which the donjon dating from the first half 
of the nth century is the oldest portion. To Rotrou I., founder 
of the chateau, the town owes the second part of its name. 

Nogent preserves three Gothic churches and the remains of the 
old priory of St Denis, and there are statues of General St Pol, 
killed at Sevastopol, and of the poet Remy Belleau (16th century), 
a native of the town. The town has a sub-prefecture, a tribunal 
of first instance, a communal college and institution for deaf 
mutes. 


NOGENT-SUR-MARNE, a town of northern France, in the 
department of Seine, on a hill on the right bank of the Marne, 
6 m. E. of Paris by rail. Pop. (1006) 11,463. The Eastern 
railway here crosses the Marne valley by a viaduct 875 yds. in 
length. Nogent has a Gothic cburch, with a tower of the Roman- 
esque period, in front of which there is a monument to Watteau, 
who died here in 172 1. Chemical products are manufactured. 
The fine situation of the town gained it the name of Beaute, and 
Charles V. buiit a chateau here (demolished in the 18th century) 
which was presented by Charles VII. to Agnes Sorel with the 
title of Dame de Beaute. An island in the Marne to the south of 
the town is still known as the lie de Beaute. 


NOGENT-SUR-SEINE, a town of north-central France, capital 
of an arrondissement in the department of Aube, on the left 
bank of the Seine, 35 m. N.W. of Troyes on the Paris-Belfort line. 
Pop. (1906) 3791. The river at this point forms an island, 
which supports a stone bridge of the 17th century. The chief 
building is the church of St Laurent (1421-1554). A lateral 
portal in the flamboyant style and the Renaissance tower at the 
west end are of great beauty. The town is the seat of a sub- 
prefect and has a tribunal of first instance. There is trade in 
grain, flour, fodder, wood and cattle. Nogen-sur-Seine was in 
1814 the scene of fighting between the French and Austrians. 


NOGI, KITEN, Count (1840- ), Japanese general, was 
born in Choshu. He commanded a brigade at the battle of 
Kinchow (1894) and the subsequent capture of Port Arthur 
from the Chinese; but the most memorable events of his career 
were the siege of Port Arthur by the third army corps of Japan 
under his command in the Russo-Japanese War (1904-5), and 
the great flanking march made by the same army in the battle of 
Mukden. . 


NOIRMOUTIER, an island of western France, belonging to 
the department of Vendee, and protecting the Bay of Bourgneuf 
on the south-west. Pop. (1906) 8388. The area amounts to 
22 sq. m., one-sixth dunes. Between the island and the mainland 
is a sandbank laid bare at low water, and crossed by an embank- 
ment and carriage road some 2^ m. long. It was not till about 
1766 that it was found possible to walk across to the island, 
which lies from N.N.W. to S.S.E., and is 12 m. long, its breadth 
varying from 1 m. in the south part to 3 or 4 m. in the north. 
It appears to be formed of alluvial deposits gradually accumu- 
lated round a rock of no great size situated at the meeting-place 
of the Gascony and Brittany currents. Fishing, agriculture, 
oyster-breeding and work in the salt marshes also occupy the 
inhabitants. There are two communes, Noirmoutier and 
Barbatre. Noirmoutier, which has a small port, has about 
2165 of its 6644 inhabitants gathered together in a little town 
with narrow and winding streets. Its castle was once the residence 
of the abbot of Her. In the church (12th, 14th and 19th 
centuries) there is a crypt of the nth century. A mile to the 
north of the town lies a pleasant watering-place, rendered 
picturesque by the La Chaise woods (evergreen oaks and pines), 
and a grand confusion of rocks, among which lie charming 
beaches. A dolmen, several menhirs, and the ruins of a Gallo- 
Roman villa with its hot baths show that the island must have 
, been occupied at an early date; but the first fact in its recorded 
history is the foundation of the Benedictine monastery of Her 
by St Philibert about 680. From this monastery the name 
Noirmoutier (Heri monaster turn, Hermouiicr) is derived. It had 
already attained to great prosperity when it was pillaged by the 
Normans in 825 and 843. In 1205 the abbey of Notre Dame la 
Blanche was built at the north extremity of the island to take 
the place of a Cistercian convent established in the lie du Pilier, 
at that time attached to Noirmoutier by a dike. This abbey was 
ruined by the Protestants in 1562. In the 15th, 16th and 17th 
centuries the island belonged to the family of La Tremoille, and 
in 1650 the territory was made a duchy. In 1676 the island was 
captured by the Dutch. Having been seized by Charette during 
the war of Vendee, it was recovered by the Republican general, 
Haxo, who caused the Vendean leader, d'ElbSe, to be shot. 


NOISE (a word of doubtful origin; O. Fr. nogse or nose; 
Prov. nausa, which points to Lat. nausea, sickness, as the origin; 
others take Lat. noxia, harm, as the source), an excessive, offen- 
sive, persistent or startling sound. By the common law of 
England freedom from noise is essential to the full enjoyment 
of a dwelling house, and acts which affect that enjoyment may 
be actionable as nuisances. But it has been laid down that a 
nuisance by noise, supposing malice to be out of the question, 
is emphatically a question of degree (Gaunt v. Finney, 1872, 
8 Ch. Ap. 8). The noise must be exceptional and unreasonable. 
The ringing of bells, building operations, vibration of machinery, 
fireworks, bands, a circUs, merry-go-rounds, collecting disorderly 
crowds, dancing, singing, &c, have been held under certain 
circumstances to constitute nuisances so as to interfere with 
quiet and comfort, and have been restrained by injunction. 
Noise occasioned by the frequent repetition of street cries is 
frequently the subject of local by-laws, which impose penalties 
for infringement. 


NOISOME, harmful, offensive, especially of that which causes 
physical disgust. The word is formed from the obsolete " noy," 
trouble, a shortened form of " annoy," now only used as a verb, 
to cause trouble, the usual substantive being " annoyance." 
The O. Fr. anoi, anui (modern ennui) is an adaptation of Lat. 
in odio esse, venire or habere, to be sick, tired of anything (odium, 
disgust, hatred). The word has no connexion with Lat. nocere, 
to hurt. 


NOKES (Noke, Noak, Noakes), JAMES (d. 1692), an English 
actor, whose laughter-arousing genius is attested by Cibber and 
other contemporaries. Sir Martin Mar-all, Sir Davy Dunce 
and Sir Credulous Easy were among his favourite parts. His 
success as the Nurse in Nevil Payne's Fatal Jealousy was so 
great that he was thereafter nicknamed " Nurse Nokes." 


NOLA, a city and episcopal see of Campania, Italy, in the 
province of Caserta, pleasantly situated in the plain between 
Mount Vesuvius and the Apennines, i6f m. E.N.E. of Naples, 
121 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 11,927 (town); 14,511 
(commune). It is served by the local railway from Naples to 
Baiano, and is 22 m. from Naples by the main line via Caneello. 
The more conspicuous buildings are the ancient Gothic cathedral 
(restored in 1866, and again in 1870 after the interior was 
destroyed by fire), with its lofty tower, the cavalry barracks, 
the ex-convent of the Capuchins at a little distance from the 
city, and the seminary in which are preserved the famous 
Oscan inscription known as the Cippus Abellanus (from Abella, 
the modern Avella, q.v.) and some Latin inscriptions relating 
to a treaty with Nola regarding a joint temple of Hercules. 
Two fairs are held in Nola, on the 14th of June and the 12th 
of November; and the 26th of July is devoted to a great festival 
in honour of St Paulinus, one of the early bishops of the city, 
who invented the church bell (campana, taking its name from 
Campania). The church erected by him in honour of St Felix 
in the 4th century is extant in part. There is a monument 
(restored in 1887) to Giordano Bruno, the free-thinker, who 
was born at Nola in 1 548. 

Nola (NtoXa) was one of the oldest cities of Campania, variously 
said to have been founded by the Ausones, the Chalcidians and 
the Etruscans. The last-named were certainly in Nola about 
500 B.C. At the time when it sent assistance to Neapolis against 
the Roman invasion (328 B.C.) it was probably occupied by Oscans 
in alliance with the Samnites. The Romans made themselves 
masters of Nola in 313 B.C., and it was thenceforth faithful to 
Rome, In the Second Punic War it thrice bade defiance to 
Hannibal; but in the Social War it was betrayed into the hands 
of the Samnites, who kept possession till Marius, with whom 
they had sided, was defeated by Sulla, who in 80 B.C. subjected 
it with the rest of Samnium. Seven years later it was stormed 
by Spartacus. Whatever punishment Sulla may have inflicted, 
Nola, though it lost much of its importance, remained a 
municipium with its own institutions and the use of the Oscan 
language. It became a Roman colony under Augustus, who 
died at Nola. Sacked by Genseric in 455, and' by the Saracens 
in 806 and 904, captured by Manfred in the 13th century, and 
damaged by earthquakes in the 15th and 16th, Nola lost much 
of its importance. The revolution of 1820 under General Pepe 
began at Nola. The sculptor Giovanni Marliano was a native of 
the city; and some of his works are preserved in the cathedral. 

Nola lay on the Via Popillia from Capua to Nuceria and the 
south, and a branch road ran from it to Abella and Abellinum. 
Mommsen (Corp. inscr. Lat. x. 142) further states that roads 
must have run direct from Nola to Neapolis and Pompeii, but 
Kiepert's map annexed to the volume does not indicate them. 
In the days of its independence it issued an important series 
of coins, and in luxury it vied with Capua. Its territory was 
very fertile, and this was the principal source of its wealth. 
A large number of vases of Greek style were manufactured here 
and have been found in the neighbourhood. Their material 
is of pale yellow clay with shining black glaze, and they are 
decorated with skilfully drawn red figures. Of the ancient city, 
which occupied the same site as the modern town, hardly any- 
thing is now visible, and the discoveries of the ancient street 
pavement have not been noted with sufficient care to enable 
us to recover the plan. Numerous ruins, an amphitheatre, 
still recognizable, a theatre, a temple of Augustus, &c., existed 
in the 16th century, and have been since used for building 
material. They are described by A. Leone, De Nola (Venice, 
1 514). A few tombs of the Roman period are preserved. The 
neighbourhood was divided into pagi, the names of some of 
which are preserved to us (Pagus Agrifanus, Capriculanus, 
Lanitanus). • (T. As.) 


NOLDEKE, THEODOR (1836- ), German Semitic scholar, 
was born at Harburg on the 2nd of March 1836, and studied 
at Gottingen, Vienna, Leiden and Berlin. In 1859 his history 
of the Koran won for him the prize of the French Acad6mie des 
Inscriptions, and in the following year he rewrote it in German 
(Geschichte des Korans) and published it with additions at 
Gottingen. In 1861 he began to lecture at the university of 
this town, where three years later he was appointed extraordinary 
professor. In 1868 he became ordinary professor at Kiel, and 
in 1872 was appointed to the chair of Oriental languages at 
Strassburg, which he resigned in 1906. Noldeke's range of studies 
has been wide and varied, but in the main his work has followed 
the two lines already indicated by his prize essay, Semitic 
languages, and the history and civilization of Islam. While 
a great deal of his work (e.g. his Grammatik der neusyrischen 
Sprache, 1868, his Mandaische Grammatik, 1874, and his transla- 
tions from the Arabian of Tabari, 1 881-1882) is meant for 
specialists, many of his books are of interest to the general 
reader. Several of his essays first appeared in the Encyclopedia 
Britannica, and his article on the Koran, with some others, was 
republished in a volume called Oriental Sketches. The articles 
dealing with Persia were republished in a German volume, 
Aufsatze zur persischen Geschichte (Leipzig, 1887). Among his 
best-known works are: Das Leben Mohammeds (1863); Beitrage 
zur Kenntnis der Poesie der alten Araber (1864); Die alttestament- 
liche Literatur (1868) ; Untersuchungen zur Kritik des Alien Testa- 
ments (1869); Zur Grammatik des klassischen Arabisch (1896); 
Fiinf Mo^allaqal, fiber seizt und erklart (1 899-1901); and Beitrage 
zur semitischen Sprachwissenschajl (1904). He has contributed 
frequently to the Zeiischrijt der deutschen morgenlandischen 
GeseUschaftj the Gottingische gelehrte Anzeigen and the Expositor. , 


NOLI, a coast village of Liguria, Italy, in the province of Genoa, 
from which it is 36 m. S.W. by rail, 13 ft. above sea-level. Pop. 
(1901) 1985. It is a town of considerable antiquity, now 
decayed, and has an ancient church of S. Paragorio, once the 
cathedral, a Romanesque basilica dating from the nth century, 
with interesting works of art. The diocese has been united 
with that of Savona. 

See A. d'Andrade, Relazione deiV Ufficio Reqionalt per la conser- 
vazione dei monumenti del Pitmonte e delta Ltguria (Turin, 1899), 
IOO seq. 

NOLLEKENS, JOSEPH (1737-1823) British sculptor, was born 
on the nth of August 1737 in Dean Street, Soho, London, 
where his father, a native of Antwerp, the " old Nollekens " of 
Horace Walpole, was a painter of some repute. In his thirteenth 
year he entered the studio of the sculptor Peter Scheemakers, 
and practised drawing and modelling with great assiduity, 
ultimately gaining various prizes offered by the Society of Arts. 
In 1760 he went to Rome, and he executed a marble bas-relief, 
" Timoclea before Alexander," which obtained a prize of fifty 
guineas from that society in 1762. Garrick and Sterne were 
among the first English visitors who sat to him for busts; among 
his larger pieces belonging to this early period perhaps the most 
important is the " Mercury and Venus chiding Cupid." Having 
returned to England in 1770, he was admitted an associate of the 
Royal Academy in i77i,and elected a member in 1772, the year 
in which he married Mary, the second daughter of Saunders 
Welch. By this time he had become known to George III., 
whose bust he shortly afterwards executed, and henceforward, 
until about 1816, he was the most fashionable portrait sculptor 
of his day. He himself thought highly of his early portrait of 
Sterne. Among many others may be specially named those of 
Pitt, Fox, the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV.), Canning, 
Perceval, Benjamin West and Lords Castlereagh, Aberdeen, 
Erskine, Egremont and Liverpool. He elaborated a number of 
marble groups and statues, amongst which may be mentioned 
those of " Bacchus," " Venus taking off her Sandal," " Hope 
leaning on an Urn," " Juno," " Paetus and Arria," " Cupid and 
Psyche " and (his own favourite performance) " Venus anointing 
Herself"; all, however, although remarkable for delicacy of 
workmanship, are deficient in vigour and originality, and the 
drapery is peculiarly weak. The most prominent personal 
characteristic of Nollekens seems to have been his frugality, 
which ultimately developed into absolute miserliness. Mrs 
Nollekens died in 1817, and the sculptor himself died in 
London on the 23rd of April 1823, leaving a large fortune. 


NOLLE PROSEQUI (sometimes shortened into nol. pros.), 
a technical term of English law, the meaning of which varies 
as it is used with reference to civil or criminal cases. In civil 
cases it applied only to actions in the king's bench division, and 
there signified a formal undertaking by the plaintiff that he 
intended to proceed no further with the action (se ulterius nolle 
prosequi). The more modern practice in such cases is to proceed 
by way of discontinuance. In proceedings either by indictment 
or by information, a nolle prosequi or stay of proceedings may 
be entered by the attorney-general. The nolle prosequi is a 
matter purely for his discretion, and will not be granted unless 
very good ground be shown for his interference. The object 
of it generally is to obtain a stay of proceedings against an 
accomplice in order to procure his evidence. This object is, 
however, more usually effected by the prosecution offering 
no evidence and the judge directing an acquittal. 

In the United States the term bears the same meaning as in 
England, with one exception. The attorney-general has not the 
same discretion with which English law invests him. Although 
in some states the prosecuting officer may enter a nolle prosequi 
at his discretion, in others the leave of the court must be 
obtained. 


NOLLET, JEAN ANTOINE (1 700-1770), French physicist, 
of peasant origin, was born near Noyon (Oise) on the 19th of 
November 1700. He entered holy orders and ultimately attained 
the rank of abbe; but his tastes all lay in the direction of 
experimental research, especially on the subject of electricity. 
In 1 734 he was admitted a member of the London Royal Society, 
four years later he entered the Academy of Sciences at Paris, and 
in 1753 he was appointed to the newly-instituted chair of experi- 
mental physics in the College de Navarre. In addition to many 
memoirs he wrote Lecons de physique expeWimentale (1743)? Essai 
sur Vilectriciti des corps (1747), Recherches sur les causes particu- 
litres des phinomenes tlectriques (1749 and 1754), Recueil de 
lettres sur VilectriciU (1753), V Art de /aire les chapeaux (1764) 
and V Art des experiences (1770). He died at Paris on the 24th 
of April 1770. 


NOMAD (Gr. voixbs, po/z&Scs, wandering), a wanderer. The 
word is particularly used of tribes who shift continually from 
place to place in search of pasture (Gr. vkymv). The vofiides of 
ancient Greek writers meant particularly the pastoral tribes of 
North Africa; hence the Latin name of the Numidians (see 
Numidia). 


NOME, a mining town about 12 m. W. of Cape Nome, on the S. 
shore of Seward Peninsula, Alaska, in 1900 the largest settlement 
in the district. Pop. (1900) 12,488; (1910) 2600. Gulch gold was 
found near Nome on Anvil Creek in September 1898, and diggings 
in the ocean beach were first worked in July 1899. The rush to 
Nome in 1900 was one of the most remarkable stampedes in 
American mining history; the town soon had hotels, banks, 
stores, several newspapers and weekly mails from the States, 
and for part of the year there were, it was estimated, 20,000 
inhabitants. This rapidity of growth and the isolation of the 
settlement raised prices to extraordinary heights, and in other 
respects created economic conditions remarkable even among 
Alaskan' mining camps. By 1903 the population had greatly 
decreased, and in subsequent years the winter population 
averaged about 3500, the summer population from 7000 to 8000. 
In 1905 the gold output of the Nome region amounted to about 
$2,500,000, nearly all from placers, though some quartz mining 
was done. A municipal government and local police force were 
early organized after the fashion of American mining communities, 
and United States soldiers from the St Michael reservation aided 
in the preservation of order. The greatest drawback to the 
town's prosperity is the lack of any good harbour nearer than 
Point Clarence, 80 m. W. The winter ice-floes, sometimes 30 ft. 
high on the beach, render harbour improvements at Nome 
almost impossible. There is connexion with Seattle by steamer 
(since 1 904) in about 8 J days. In 1 901 the town was incorporated 
under the laws of the United States. It is the north-western 
terminus of the United States military telegraph. It was first 
called Anvil City; the name " Nome " is derived from Cape 
Nome, first so called on a chart dated 1849, and said to have been 
a draughtsman's mistake for the query " ? Name " on the 
original chart. 


NOMENOfi, or Nominoe (d. 851), duke of Brittany. The date 
of his birth is not known, and his origin is obscure; all that is 
known is that he was of Breton race. In the hope of pacifying 
Brittany, Louis the Debonair named him count of Vannes in 
819 and governor or duke of Brittany in 826. Throughout the 
reign of Louis, Nomenoe's fidelity to the emperor never flagged; 
he put down several attempted insurrections, and maintained 
peace in Brittany for fifteen years. But in 841 he resolved to 
make himself independent of Charles the Bald. In 843 Charles 
made a vain attempt to subdue Brittany. In 844 Nomenoe 
invaded Maine, and in 845 the emperor was completely defeated 
at Ballon near Bain-de-Bretagne. In the following year Charles 
recognized the independence of Brittany. Having resolved to 
detach the duchy from the ecclesiastical province of Tours, 
Nomenoe accused the Frankish bishops of Vannes, Quimper, 
Dol and L6on of simony at the council of Coetlouh in 848, 
replaced them by Bretons, and erected Dol into a metropolitan 
see. In 849 Nomenoe attacked the Frankish county of Anjou. 
Charles retaliated by establishing a garrison at Rennes; but 
Nomenoe seized Rennes, Nantes and, finally, the whole of Upper 
Brittany, and ravaged Maine. In 851 he seized Anjou and 
invaded Beauce; but he died suddenly, leaving as his successor 
his son Erispoe. 

See A. de la Borderie, Histoire de Bretagne, vol. ii. (1898) ; R. Merlet, 
" Guerres d'ind^pendance de la Bretagne," in the Revue de Bretagne, 
de VendSe et d' Anjou (1891). 


NOMENTANA, VIA, an ancient road of Italy, leading N.E. 
from Rome to Nomentum (q.v.) t a distance of 14 m. It originally 
bore the name Via Ficulensis, from the old Latin village of 
Ficulea, about 8 m. from Rome. It was subsequently prolonged 
to Nomentum, but never became an important highroad, and 
merged in the Via Salaria (see SAlaria, Via) a few miles beyond 
Nomentum. It is followed as far as Nomentum by the modern 
highroad, but some traces of its pavement still exist. 

See T. Ashby in Papers of Brit. School at Rome, iii. 38 sqq. (T. As.) 


NOMENTUM (mod. Mentana)> an ancient town of Italy, 14 m. 
N.E. of Rome by the Via Nomentana. It was a Latin town, 
but was by some considered to be Sabine, and, like Fidenae 
and Ficulea, was excluded from the first region by Augustus, 
who made the Anio its northern boundary. Nomentum received 
the civitas sine sufragio after the last war of the Latins 
against Rome (338 B.C.); in its municipal constitution the chief 
magistrate even in imperial times bore the title of dictator. 
Pliny and Martial often praise the fertility of its neighbourhood. 
The site of the town is well protected by ravines except on the 
east; no ancient remains exist in situ, but inscriptions and 
other relics have been found. 

See T. Ashby in Papers of the British School at Rome, iii. 68 sqq. 

(T. As.) 


NOMINALISM (from Lat. nomen, name), the name of one 
of the two main tendencies of medieval philosophy, the other 
being Realism. The controversy between nominalists and 
realists arose from a passage in Boethius* translation of Porphyry's 
Introduction to the Categories of Aristotle, which propounded the 
problem of genera and species, (1) as to whether they subsist 
in themselves or only in the mind; (2) whether, if subsistent, 
they are corporeal or incorporeal; and (3) whether separated 
from sensible things or placed in them. The Realists held that 
universals alone have substantial reality, existing ante res; 
the Nominalists that universals are mere names invented to 
express the qualities of particular things and existing post res; 
while the Conceptualists, mediating between the two extremes, 
held that universals are concepts which exist in our minds and 
express real similarities in things themselves. Though a strong 
realist tendency is evident in the system of Erigena (9th century), 
the controversy was not definitely started till the nth century: 
it lasted till the middle of the 12th, when the first period of 
scholastic philosophy ends. Under an appearance of much vain 
subtlety the controversy about universals involved issues of the 
greatest speculative and practical importance: realism repre- 
sented a spiritual, nominalism an anti-spiritual, view of the world; 
while realism was evidently favourable, and nominalism unfavour- 
able, to the teaching of the Church on the dogmas of the Trinity 
and the Eucharist. Nominalism was a doctrine of sceptics and 
suspected heretics, such as Berengar of Tours and Roscellinus. 
Even Abelard's mediating doctrine of conceptualism (q.v.) was 
sufficiently near to obnoxious ideas to involve him in lifelong 
persecution. The principles of the great orthodox philosophers 
of the later scholastic period which begins in the 13th century, 
Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, were those of moderate 
realism. When nominalism was revived in the 14th century 
by the English Franciscan, William of Occam, it gave evidence 
of a new tendency in thought, a distrust of abstractions and an 
impulse towards direct observation and inductive research, a 
tendency which had its fulfilment in the scientific movement 
of the Renaissance. Occam's dictum " Entia non multiplicanda 
sunt praeter necessitatem " was inspired by a spirit similar to 
that of Bacon. Though nominalism is properly a medieval 
theory, the tendency has passed over into modern philosophy: 
the term " nominalist " is often applied to thinkers of the 
empirical, sensationalist school, of whom J. S. Mill may be 
taken as the chief representative. (H. St.) 


NONCONFORMIST, a term denoting historically (a) those 
persons who at the beginning of the 17th century refused to 
conform to certain practices, e.g. the wearing of the surplice, 
kneeling at the reception of the Sacrament, &c, of the Church 
of England; (b) those who, after the passing of the Act of 
Uniformity 1662, refused to conform to that act and ceased 
to be members of the church. In current usage the term " non- 
conformist " is applied in Great Britain to any member of a 
church not conforming to the ceremonies, worship and doctrines 
("forms") of the Church of England, but is generally used of a 
member of the so-called Free Churches, or Protestant Dissenters, 
and is not usually applied to Roman Catholics. The name can 
also be applied, in other countries, to those who do not belong 
to the established religion. Strictly a " dissenter " is one who 
dissents from the church as an " established " body, or who 
dissents from the establishment of a state church, while conform- 
ing or not to its forms, ceremonies or practice. 


NONCONFORMITY, LAW RELATING TO. For the history 
of the gradual relief of nonconformists in England from their 
disabilities see English History, Baptists, Congregational- 
ism, Methodism, Friends, Society of, &c; also Oath. It is 
proposed here to note simply the present legal aspects of non- 
conformity apart from its history, that is, the matters in which 
the law as to nonconformists still differs from that applicable 
to members of the Church of England. The differences may be 
conveniently grouped under six heads. 

(i) Judicial Notice. — The courts, both temporal and spiritual, 
take judicial notice of the tenets and authorities of the Church of 
England, the crown being head of the law and of the church. Where 
the tenets and authorities of a nonconformist body come in question, 
they must be proved by evidence. By Lord Lyndhurst's act, the 
Nonconformist Chapels Act 1844, where no particular religious 
doctrine or mode of worship has been prescribed by the deed or 
instrument of trust the usage of the congregation for twenty-five 
years is to be taken as conclusive evidence of the doctrine and worship 
which may be properly observed in such meeting-houses. (2) 
Tribunal.-— Offences against the law ecclesiastical (not being crimes) 
committed by clergy of the Church of England as a rule come by letters 
of request from the bishop of the diocese before the arches court of 
Canterbury or the chancery court of York (of both of which the 
same person is judge). Similar matters arising in nonconformist 
bodies can only be tried by the ordinary secular courts, and generally 
depend upon the question whether a minister has done any act 
which is not in accordance with the rules governing the particular 
body of which he is a minister. A nonconformist body is in law 
nothing more than a voluntary association, whose members may 
enforce discipline by any tribunal assented to by them, but must be 
subject in the last degree to the courts of the realm. Brawling in 
a church was an offence which formerly fell solely under the cogniz- 
ance of the spiritual courts, but by the Ecclesiastical Courts Juris- 
diction Act i860 any person guilty of brawling in churches or chapels 
of the Church of England or Ireland, or in any chapel of any religious 
denomination, is liable on conviction to a fine or imprisonment (see 
Brawling), while clergymen of the Church of England may also be 
dealt with under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892. (3) Status of 
Ministers. — A nonconformist minister is not in holy orders, and his 
chapel is not a consecrated building. His status is, however, recog- 
nized to a limited extent. By the Toleration Act, 1 Will. & Mar., 
c. 18, a minister, preacher or teacher of a nonconformist congregation 
is exempt from certain parochial offices, as that of churchwarden. He 
is also exempt from serving in the reserve forces or on a jury. These 
privileges only attach where the place of worship of which he is a 
minister has been duly registered (the Places of Worship Registration 
Act 1855), unless in the case of bodies subject to special legislation, 
as Quakers. Registration is not required in the case of consecrated 
buildings. By the Municipal Corporations Act 1882, s. 12, a noncon- 
formist minister (as is a clerk in holy orders) is disqualified from being 
elected an alderman or councillor of a town council, but under the 
Local Government Act 1888 a clerk in holy orders, or other minister of 
religion, may be a councillor or alderman of a county council, and, 
under the London Government Act 1899, of a metropolitan borough. 
He cannot take a degree in divinity at Oxford, Cambridge or Durham 
(Universities Tests Act 1871), and so is debarred from holding any 
professorship of divinity in those universities. (4) Marriage. — 
Marriage by a person in holy orders was probably necessary at 
common law, at any rate from the Reformation up to 1836. (See 
Marriage.) And from the date of Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act, 
I 753i up to 1836 the ceremony must have been performed in a 
consecrated building. The first act of parliament that relieved 
dissenters (other than Jews and Quakers) from these restrictions 
was the Marriage Act of 1836. By that act the ceremony of marriage 
might be performed in a nonconformist place of worship, but it must 
be after due notice to the superintendent registrar and in his presence 
or in that of a registrar, and the building must be one that is duly 
certified for marriages. The Marriage Act 1898 dispensed with the 
necessity of the attendance of a registrar at marriages celebrated 
at a nonconformist^ place of worship, substituting in place thereof a 
person duly authorized by the trustees of the place of worship, if the 
persons intending to be married so desire; but the parties may, if 
they wish, still require the presence of the registrar. Marriage by 
banns, licence or special licence cannot take place except in a church. 
(5) Burial.^ — By the Burial Laws Amendment Act 1880 burial may 
take place in a churchyard without the rites of the Church of England. 
But in such a case notice must be given in a specified form, which is 
unnecessary where the burial service is conducted by a clergyman 
of the Church of England. (6) Parish Offices.— By 1 Will. & Mar. 
c. 18, s. 5, a dissenter chosen churchwarden and scrupling to take 
the oaths may execute his office by deputy. His acceptance of office 
is made optional by the act; there is nothing to prevent his dis- 
charging it if he see fit to do so. This seems to be still the law, although 
a declaration was substituted for the oath by the Statutory Declara- 
tions Act 1835, s. 9. 

British Colonies. — In crown colonies ecclesiastical jurisdiction may 
be conferred by the sole authority of the crown. In colonies which 
have parliamentary representation the crown cannot give to a 
metropolitan bishop jurisdiction or coercive legal authority over 
suffragan bishops or over any other person. In colonies of the 
former kind the Church of England may still preserve the privileges 
which attach to her in the mother country ; in colonies of the latter 
kind she is in the same position as any other religious body, simply 
a voluntary association. Since the Irish Church Act 1869 the Church 
of Ireland has been practically in the same position as the Church 
of England in colonies which have representative government. 


NONFEASANCE, Misfeasance, Malfeasance. The ex- 
pressions " nonfeasance " and " misfeasance," and occasionally 
" malfeasance," are used in English law with reference to the 
discharge of public obligations existing by common law, custom 
or statute. The rule of law laid down is that no action lies for 
nonfeasance, i.e. for failure or refusal to perform the obligation, 
but that an action does lie for misfeasance or malfeasance, i.e. 
for negligently and improperly performing the obligation. 
The doctrine was formerly applied to certain callings carried 
on publicly (see R. v. Kilderby, 1669, 1 Will. Saund. 3n, 312c). 
At present the terms misfeasance and nonfeasance are of tenest 
used with reference to the conduct of municipal authorities 
with reference to the discharge of their statutory obligations; 
and it is an estabb'shed rule that an action lies in favour of 
persons injured by misfeasance, i.e. by negligence in discharge 
of the duty; but that in the case of nonfeasance the remedy 
is not by action but by indictment or mandamus or by the 
particular procedure prescribed by the statutes. This rule is 
fully established in the case of failure to repair public highways; 
but in other cases the courts are astute to find evidence of 
carelessness in the discharge of public duties and on that basis 
to award damages to individuals who have suffered thereby. 
Misfeasance is also used with reference to the conduct of directors 
and officers of joint-stock companies. The word malfeasance 
is sometimes used as equivalent to mala praxis by a medical 
practitioner. (W. F. C.) 


NONIUS MARCELLUS, Latin grammarian and lexicographer, 
flourished at the end of the 3rd or the beginning of the 4th 
century a.d. He is often called the " Peripatetic of Thubur- 
sicum " (in Numidia, probably his birth-place). He is the 
author of a sort of lexicon called De compendwsa doctrina 7 
in 20 sections or chapters, the first twelve of which deal with 
language and grammar, the remaining eight with special subjects 
(navigation, costume, food, arms). The work is a compilation 
from commentaries on the authors quoted (whom Nonius only 
knows at second hand) and from existing dictionaries and 
grammars. Nonius is especially indebted to Verrius Flaccus 
and Aulus Gellius. The Doclrina is valuable as preserving 
fragments from old dramatists, annalists, satirists and anti- 
quarian writers. It is remarkable that in the quotations from 
the authors cited Nonius always follows the same order, beginning 
with Plautus and ending with Varro and Cato. The grammarians 
Priscian and Fulgentius borrowed largely from his book; and 
in the 5th century a certain Julius Tryphonianus Sabinus 
brought out a revised and annotated edition. 

Editions by L. Muller (1888); J. H. Onions, bks. i.-iii. (1895); 
W. M. Lindsay (1903) (reviewed in Classical Review, October 1904). 
See also articles in the Classical Review (Dec. 1888, June and July 
1889); J. H. Onions (Oct. 1890, Oct. 1895, Feb, 1896, Feb. 1002); 
W. M. Lindsay; Journal of Philology, xvi. (1888), xviii. (1890), Q. H. 
Onions), xxi. (1893). ("The Printed Editions of Nonius," by H. 
Nettleship); P. Monceaux, Les Africains. £tude stir la litterature 
latine d'Afrique (1894); Teuffel, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng. 
trans.), 404A; M. Schanz, Geschichte der romischen Liter atur % iv. 1 
(1904). 


NONJURORS, the name given to those beneficed clergy of the 
Church of England who refused to take the oaths of allegiance 
to William and Mary in 1689. They were about four hundred in 
number, and included William Sancroft, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, and four others of the " Seven Bishops," Thomas Ken of 
Bath and Wells, John Lake of Chichester, Thomas White of 
Peterborough and Francis Turner of Ely, together with three 
other bishops, Robert Frampton of Gloucester, William Thomas 
of Worcester and William Lloyd of Norwich (who is sometimes 
confused with his namesake, the bishop of St Asaph, one of the 
"Seven Bishops". Other distinguished nonjurors among the 
clergy were: William Sherlock, master of the Temple, Jeremy 
Collier, the ecclesiastical historian, Charles Leslie, the contro- 
versialist, George Hickes, dean of Worcester, Nathanael Spinckes, 
John Fitzwilliam, canon of Windsor, and John Kettle well, the 
devotional writer. The most famous nonjurors among the laity 
were Henry Dodwell, Camden professor of history at Oxford, 
Robert Nelson, Henry Hyde, second earl of Clarendon, and 
Roger North, the lawyer. Afterwards their number was aug- 
mented by the refusal of William Law, author of The Serious 
Call } Thomas Carte, the historian, Thomas Hearne, the antiquary, 
and others, to take the oaths of allegiance to George I. Ken, 
the most eminent of the nonjurors, disapproved of their sub- 
sequent proceedings, and Sherlock and Dodwell afterwards took 
the required oaths, the former becoming dean of St Paul's. 

Believing in the doctrine of * non-resistance to established 
authority, the nonjurors argued that James II. was still the 
rightful king, and likened the position of William to that of 
Cromwell. Taking examples from the Old Testament and from 
the practice of the early church, their antagonists traversed 
these arguments, and a long and voluminous controversy 
followed. Many have thought that the position of the nonjurors 
was inconsistent, and Dr Johnson said, " I never knew a non- 
juror who could reason," although he appears to have excepted 
Leslie from this general condemnation. The government did 
not treat the nonjurors harshly. With the approval of William 
III., Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, attempted to reconcile 
them to the new order; and it was only when the generous terms 
offered by Burnet had been refused, that, in February 1690, they 
were deprived of their sees and other benefices. Although they 
had only a small following among the mass o( the people, who 
were not required to take the oaths of allegiance, Sancroft and 
his colleagues claimed to represent the true Church of England, 
and requested James II. in his exile to nominate two new bishops 
to carry on the episcopal succession. James chose Hickes and 
Thomas Wagstaffe (1645-1712), who were consecrated in 1694 
as bishops of Thetford and Ipswich respectively. A further 
consecration took place in 1713 when Collier, Spinckes and 
Samuel Hawes (d. 1722), were consecrated " bishops at large." 
In 1 7 18 the introduction of a new communion office with some 
" usages " taken partly from primitive liturgies, and partly 
from the first prayer-book of Edward VI. caused a schism among 
the nonjurors, dividing them into " Usagers " and " Non- 
Usagers." The four "usages" were: The mixed chalice, 
prayers for the faithful departed, prayer for the descent of the 
Holy Ghost on the consecrated elements, and the Oblatory 
Prayer, offering the elements to the Father as symbols of His 
Son's Body and Blood. Accepting the " usages " the two bodies 
united in 1731, but other dissensions followed, although the 
episcopal succession was maintained until the death of a bishop 
named Charles Booth in 1805. The last nonjuror is supposed to 
have been James Yeowell, who died in 1875. Public worship 
was conducted in chapels or " oratories," and sometimes in 
private houses. 

In Scotland the nonjurors included the greater part of the 
clergy of the Episcopal Church, which ceased to be the state 
church in 1689. Many of these men and some of their English 
colleagues were ardent Jacobites, and were punished for sharing 
in the risings of 1715 and 1745, and in other Jacobite movements. 
The Scottish clergy maintained their attitude of resistance to 
the government until the death of Prince Charles Edward Stuart 
in 1788, when the bishops met at Aberdeen, and unanimously 
agreed to submit to the government of King George III. A 
large number of the Presbyterians in Scotland, principally found 
among the Cameronians, also refused to take the oaths of allegi- 
ance to William and Mary; but as their reasons for this refusal 
were quite different from those of the episcopalian nonjurors, 
they are not usually referred to by this name (see Cameronians). 

For the history of the nonjurors, see Macaulay, History of England 
vol. ii. (London, 1895); T. Lathbury, History of the Nonjurors 
(London, 1845); and especially J. H. Overton, The Nonjurors 
(London, 1902), a defence of the sect. (A. W. H.*) 

	XIX. 24 


NONNUS (Egyptian for " saint "), Greek epic poet, a native of 
Panopolis (Akhmim) in the Egyptian Thebaid, probably b'ved 
at the end of the 4'th or the beginning of the 5th century a.d. 
His principal work is the Dionysiaca, an epic in forty-eight books, 
the main subject of which is the expedition of Dionysus to India 
and his return. The earlier portions treat of the rape of Europa, 
the battle of the giants, the mythical history of Thebes, and it 
is not until the eighth book that the birth of the god is described. 
Other poets had already treated the subject, and since the time 
of Alexander it had gained popularity from the favourite com- 
parison of the king with the god and of his enemies with the giants. 
In its vast and formless luxuriance, its beautiful but artificial 
versification, its delineation of action and passion to the entire 
neglect of character, the poem resembles the epics of India. 
Like his countryman Claudian, Nonnus is a writer of copious 
learning and still more copious fancy, whose faults are those of 
the age in which he lived. His chief merit consists in the syste- 
matic perfection to which he brought the Homeric hexameter. 
But the very correctness of the versification renders it monoton- 
ous. His influence on the vocabulary of his successors was 
likewise very considerable. 

We also possess under his name a paraphrase (fierapokr)) of 
the Gospel of St John, which is chiefly interesting as apparently 
indicating that Nonnus in his later years was a convert to 
Christianity. The style is not inferior to that of his epic, but, 
employed in embellishing the simple narrative of the evangelist, 
it produces an impression of extreme bombast and want of taste. 
According to an epigram in the Palatine Anthology (ix. 198), 
Nonnus was also the author of a Battle of the Giants, and four 
lines of the Bassarica (also on the subject of Dionysus) have been 
preserved in Stephanus of Byzantium. 

Editio princeps (1569) ; H. Kochly (" Teubner " series, with critical 
introduction and full index of names, 1858); the most generally 
useful edition is that by the comte de Marcellus (1856), with notes 
and prolegomena, and a French prose translation. On the metre, 
see J. G. Hermann, Orphica (1805), p. 690; A. Ludwich, Beitrdge 
zur Kritik des Nonnus (1873), critical, grammatical and metrical; 
C. Lehrs, Quaestiones eptcae (1837), pp. 255-302, chiefly on metrical 
questions; on the sources, R, Kohler, Uber die Dionysiaka des 
Nonnus (1853), a short and connected analysis of the poem, with a 
comparison of the earlier and later myths; see also I. Negrisoli, 
Studio critico , , . Nonnus Panopolita, with short bibliography 
(1903)- The paraphrase on St John (editio' princeps, c. 1505) is 
edited by F. Passow (1834) and A. Scheindler (1881), with complete 
index. 


NONPAREIL, the name under which, from its supposed match- 
less beauty, a little cage-bird, chiefly imported from New Orleans, 
has long been known to English dealers (cf. Edwards, Gleanings, 
i. 132). It is the Emberiza ciris of Linnaeus, and the Cyano- 
spiza ciris of most recent ornithologists, belonging to a small 
group, now included with the buntings and finches, although 
some authors have regarded it as a tanager (q.v.). The cock 
has the head, neck and lesser wing-coverts bright blue, the 
upper part of the back yellow, deepening into green, and the 
lower parts generally, together with the rump, bright scarlet, 
tinged on the latter with purple. This gorgeous colouring is not 
assumed until the bird is at least two years old. The hen is 
green above and yellow beneath; and the younger cocks present 
an appearance intermediate between the adults of both sexes. 
The species, which is often also called the painted bunting, 
after wintering in Central America or Mexico, arrives in the 
Southern states of the American Union in April, but does not 
ordinarily proceed to the northward of South Carolina. In 
Louisiana, where it is generally known to the French-speaking 
inhabitants as the Pape — as it was to the Spaniards of Florida 
as the Mariposa pintada (painted butterfly) — it is said to be very 
abundant; and on its appearance in spring advantage is, or was, 
taken of the pugnacious disposition of the males to capture them 
alive in great numbers by means of the stuffed skin of one so 
placed in connexion with a cage-trap that they instantly fall into 
the latter on attacking what they conceive to be a rival. Belong- 
ing to the same genus as the nonpareil is the indigo-bird, Cyano- 
spiza cyanea, which, as a summer visitant, is widely diffused from 
the Missouri to the Atlantic, and extends into the provinces of 
Ontario and New Brunswick, being everywhere regarded with 
favour. Though wanting most of the bright hues of its congener, 
the indigo-bird has yet much beauty, the adult cock being nearly 
all over of a deep blue, changing, according to the light, to green. 
The hen is brown above and ochreous- white beneath. The 
" pintailed nonpareil " of aviculture (Erythrura prasina) is a 
somewhat similarly coloured but really very different bird; 
the male has a long sharp tail, and the species belongs to the 
Ploceidae (see Weaver-Bird). 


NONPAREIL (Fr. non, and pareil, like, Lat. par), having 
no equal, unrivalled. Apart from its uses as a descriptive name 
for particularly fine kinds of fruit, &c, and of certain birds, 
moths and butterflies, the chief application of the word in English 
is, in printing, to a size of type between " emerald " and " ruby," 
in the United States of America between " minion " and " agate " 
(see Typography). 


NONSUIT (Fr. non suit, he does not pursue), in law the name 
given to a judgment whereby an issue is determined against 
the plaintiff. It was a term peculiar to the English common-law 
courts before the Judicature Acts, and was simply the expression 
of the opinion of the court that, apart from the merits, the 
plaintiff's case was incomplete. It did not in any way act as 
a bar to his bringing another action for the same cause. It 
might be entered either at the wish of the plaintiff himself 
(to whom it was of course much more beneficial than judgment 
for the defendant) or by direction of the court against the will 
of the plaintiff. Although judgment of nonsuit still exists, 
it has, since the Judicature Acts, the same effect as a judgment 
on the merits, unless the court otherwise directs. This effect 
of a nonsuit was specially provided for by the rules of the 
Supreme Court of 1875. 


NOODT, GERHARD (1647-1725), Dutch jurist, was born at 
Nijmwegen in 1647. Educated at Leiden, Utrecht and Franeker, 
he became a professor of law at Leiden. As a writer on juris- 
prudence he acquired a wide reputation. His Latin style was 
modelled after the best writers, and his numerous works soon 
rose to the rank of standard authorities. Two of his political 
treatises were translated into French by Jean Barbeyrac, and 
appeared at Amsterdam in 1707 and 17 14, under the respective 
titles of Pouvoir des souverains and Liberty de conscience. 

The first edition of his collected works was published at Leiden in 
1724 and the last in 1767. That of 1735 and those subsequent 
contain a life of the author by Barbeyrac. 


NOON, midday, twelve o'clock. The O. Eng. n6n, Nor. non, 
Dutch noen, are all from Lat. nona sc. hora, the ninth hour, 
i.e. according to the Roman system, three o'clock p.m. (see Day). 
The early uses of noon till the 13th and 14th centuries are either 
as translating the Latin, especially with reference to the Cruci- 
fixion, or as equivalent to the canonical hour of " nones " (see 
Breviary). The ordinary word for twelve o'clock was middmg, 
midday, also the equivalent of the canonical hour " scxt." 
Both the office and the meal taken about that time were shifted 
to an earlier hour, and by the 14th century the ordinary use of 
" noon " is that current to-day. 

For " nones " (i.e. nonae, sc. dies) in the Roman calendar, see 
Calendar. 


NORA, an ancient town of Sardinia, 22 m. by road S.S.W. 
of Caralcs. It was founded, according to Pausanias (x. 17. 5),- 
by the Iberians under Norax, son of Hermes, and was the most 
ancient town in the island. The discoveries made on the site 
have, however, shown that it was certainly of Phoenician origin. 
In Roman times too, we find the milestones on the road from 
Nora to Bitia and even on that from Nora to Carales reckoned 
from Nora (Corp. inscr. Lat. x. 831; Ephemcris epigraphica, 
viii. 180); but the authors and the sepulchral inscriptions 
found here give us no information as to its juridical condition. 
The town occupies a characteristically Phoenician site, a small 
peninsula joined to the mainland by an isthmus, low, narrow 
and sandy. Excavations have led to the discovery of a few 
Phoenician buildings, the foundations of a temple of Tanit, 
of a road, of quay walls at the water's edge and of a watch-tower 
on the extremity of the peninsula, which rises to some 150 ft. 
above the sea. Two cemeteries were found, one of the 7th-6tb 
century B.C., consisting of tombs cut in the rock for inhumation, 
while in the other, going down to the 4th century B.C., cremation 
is the rule; there are ossuaries placed in holes in the sand, with 
a sculptured stele over each. A quantity of small objects, 
gems, ivories, glass, vases, terra-cottas, &c, were found; in 
some of them Egyptian, in others Greek, influence and importa- 
tion are apparent. To the Roman period belong an aqueduct, 
bringing the water from the neighbouring hills — one pier of it 
rests upon a destroyed nuragke — scanty remains of an amphi- 
theatre, a theatre, considerable ruins of concrete foundations 
(perhaps of villas by the sea) and a watch-tower on the promon- 
tory close to the Phoenician tower. A full description of the 
site and the excavations is given by G. Patroni in Monumenti 
del Lincei, xiv. (1905), in. On the isthmus is the curious small 
old church of S Efisio, with a nave and two aisles divided by 
heavy square pillars. At the festival of the saint (May 1-4), 
his body is brought in procession from the cathedral at Cagliari; 
the festival is much frequented by people from all parts of 
Sardinia. (T.As.) 


NORBA, an ancient town of Latium (Adjectum), Italy. It is 
situated 1 m. N.W. of the modern Norma, 1575 ft. above sea-level, 
on the west edge of the Vclscian Mountains or Monti Lepini, 
above a precipitous cliff, with a splendid view over the Pomp tine 
Marshes. It was a member of the Latin League of 499 B.C., 
and became a Latin colony in 492 B.C., as an important fortress 
guarding the Pomptine Marshes. It served in 199 as a place 
of detention for the Carthaginian hostages, and was captured 
and destroyed by Sulla's troops during the civil wars at the 
end of 82 B.C. Some revival in prosperity took place later. 
From excavations begun in 1901 it seems clear that the remains 
now visible on the site are entirely Roman. The well-preserved 
walls are in the polygonal style, ij m. in circuit, and are entirely 
embankment walls, not standing free above the internal ground 
• level. Remains of a massive tower, and of several gateways 
(notably the Porta Grande, defended by a tower) exist. Within, 
the remains of several buildings, including the substructions 
of two temples, one dedicated to Juno Lucina, have been 
examined. At the foot of the cliff are the picturesque ruins of 
the medieval town of Nainfa (i2th-i3th centuries) abandoned 
owing to the malaria. The remains of a primitive settlement, 
on the other hand, have been discovered on the mountain-side 
to the S.E., above the 13th-century abbey of Valvisciolo, where 
there is a succession of terraces supported by walls of polygonal 
work, and approached by a road similarly supported. Here 
a quantity of primitive Latin pottery has been found. The 
necropolis of this settlement was probably the extensive one 
situated at Caracupa (8th-6th century B.C.), near the railway 
station of Sermoneta, which belongs also to the 8th-6th century 
B.C., terminating thus at the precise date at which the Roman 
city of Norba began to exist. 

See L. Savignioni and R. Mengarelli in Notizie degli scavi (1901), 
514; (1903) 299, 289; (1904) 407; and Atti del Congresso Storico 
(Rome, 1903), vol. v. (Archaeologia) 255. (T.As.) 

NORBANUS, GAIUS, surnamed Bulbus (or Balbus), Roman 
politician, was a seditious and turbulent democrat. In 103 B.C., 
when tribune of the people, he accused Q. Servilius Caepio 
of having brought about the defeat of his army by the Cimbri 
through rashness, and also of having plundered the temple 
of Tolosa. Caepio was condemned and went into exile. About 
ten years later Norbanus himself was accused of treason on 
account of the disturbances that had taken place at the trial of 
Caepio, but the eloquence of M. Antonius, grandfather of the 
triumvir, procured his acquittal. In 89 Norbanus as praetor 
successfully defended Sicily against the Italian socii. , During 
the civil war between Marius and Sulla he sided with the former, 
but was defeated by Sulla at mount Tifata near Capua, and 
again by Metellus at Faventia in Cisalpine Gaul (82). He fled 
to Rhodes, where he committed suicide, while the Rhodians were 
debating whether to hand him over to Sulla. 

See Mommsen, Hist, of Rome, bk. iv. ch. v.; Greenidge, Hist, of 
Rome. 


NORCIA (anc. Nursia), a town and episcopal see of the province 
of Perugia, Italy, 29 m. E.N.E. of Spoleto by road, and 40 m. W. 
of Ascoli Piceno, 1980 ft. above sea-level, on the south-west 
foot-slopes of the Monti Sibillini, still surrounded by old walls. 
Pop. (1 901) 4261 (town), 9584 (commune). There are a cathedral, 
the church of St Benedict and other churches, with Romanesque 
14th-century facades; the town-hall; and the prefecture, 
with Romanesque arcades. Much injury was done by earth- 
quakes in 1730 and 1859. The ancient Nursia was a Sabine 
city, though close to the Umbrian border. Its inhabitants fought 
in 43-41 B.C. against Octavian, and were punished by him for 
erecting a monument "in honour of those who fell. It was 
governed by octoviri like other Sabine towns and became a 
municipium under the empire. At Ancarano near Norda was 
situated a small pagus; remains of a temple were found there in 
1880, which from the character of the objects seems to have been 
destroyed in the 5th century B.C. The tombs of the district have 
also produced interesting early bronzes, &c., some of which go 
back to the 7th century B.C., and a fine funeral couch decorated 
with sculptured pieces of bone. M. Guardabassi in Nolizie degli 
scavi> 1878, 13 sqq.; 1880, 6 sqq.; A. Pasqui in Monumenti 
dei Linceiy i. (1891) 239. The town was the birthplace of Q. 
Sertorius (d. 72 B.C.), of Vespasia, mother of the emperor 
Vespasian of Plotina, wife, of the emperor Trajan, and of St. 
Benedict, founder of the Benedictine order, and of his sister 
Scholastica. The town is famous for its pork and its cloth (the 
term norcineria for a pork butcher's shop is indeed used in Rome) 
and produces bricks and earthenware. 
See F. Patrici Forti, Memorie storiche di Norcia (Norcia, 1869). 


NORD, the most northern of the departments of France, 
formed chiefly out of Flanders, French Hainault and the district 
of Cambrai (Cambr6sis). Area 2229 sq. m. Its population 
(1,895,861 in 1906), which includes a large proportion of Belgians, 
ranks next to that of Seine among French departments. Its 
length from south-east to north-west is 112 m.; its breadth 
nowhere exceeds 40 m., and contracts to 4 where it is crossed by 
the Lys. Bounded N.W. and N. for 21 m. by the North Sea, 
it has Belgian territory on the N.E. and E., the departments 
of Aisne and Somme on the S. and Pas-de-Calais on the W. 
The Flanders portion west of the Scheldt is very flat, the isolated 
hill at Cassel, only 535 ft. high, looking north towards Dunkirk 
over a stretch of fertile lowlands, the Wateringues and the 
Moeres, separated by a line of sand-dunes from the sea, by 
which about a thousand years ago they were still covered. 
The reclamation of this district, now covered by a network of 
canals, was begun as early as the 12th century.. South-east of 
the Scheldt the country resembles the neighbouring Ardennes, 
is better wooded, and contains the highest point in the depart- 
ment (873 ft.). The greater part of Nord is in the Scheldt basin, 
but certain portions belong to those of the Sambre (Meuse), 
the Oise (Seine) and the little coast-streams the Aa and the Yser. 
The Scheldt, flowing by Cambrai, Bouchain, Valenciennes and 
Cond6, receives the Scarpe, which touches Douai, Marchiennes 
and St Amand. The Lys, which does not join the Scheldt till it 
has entered Belgium, passes Armentieres, and receives the Dcule, 
on which Lille, the capital, is situated. The Sambre passes 
Landrecies and Maubeuge. The Aa falls into the port at 
Gravelines. The climate of Nord is colder than that of France in 
general, the mean temperature being 49 or 50 F. The average 
annual rainfall is about 28 in. 

In agricultural and industrial importance Nord is the first of 
French departments. In the hilly region of the south-east stock- 
raising flourishes; in the central zone beetroot is the character- 
istic crop, while mixed farming prevails in the north-west. 
Cereals (especially wheat and oats) and potatoes are grown in 
abundance. Among minor crops, flax, tobacco, chicory and hops 
may be mentioned. Market-gardening and horticulture are 
practised on a considerable scale in some localities. The mineral 
wealth of the department lies principally in its coal mines 
forming part of the Valenciennes basin, the most important 
in France, which extends into Belgium and Pas-de-Calais. 
The textile industry is particularly active around Lille, Roubaix 
and Tourcoing which spin and weave cotton and wool, as also 
around Fourmies which is especially a weaving town. Other 
important centres are Armentieres (cloth- weaving), Dunkirk 
(flax, jute and hemp-spinning), Cambrai (batiste and other 
delicate fabrics), Douai, Avesnes, le Cateau and Caudry. Other 
great industries are brewing, flour-milling, glass, brick, pottery 
and sugar manufacture, alcohol-distilling, dyeing, iron-founding 
and steel production and other branches of the metallurgical 
industry carried on at Denain, Hautmont, Maubeuge, Valen- 
ciennes, Douai, Raismes, &c. Dunkirk and Gravelines equip 
fleets for the cod and herring fisheries. Dunkirk is the 
chief port of the department, which is served by the Northern 
railway. Its system of inland navigation is highly developed 
and attains a length of 320 m., comprising a line of waterways 
from the Scheldt to the North Sea at Dunkirk, with which the 
coal basin of Valenciennes is linked up by way of the canalized 
Scheldt and the textile region of Lille by means of the Deule 
canal and the canalized Lys. To these must be added the 
canalized Sambre and other less important waterways. 

The department is divided into seven arrondissements (Avesnes, 
Cambrai, Douai, Dunkirk, Hazebrouck, Lille, Valenciennes) 
with 67 cantons and 667 communes. It forms the archiepiscopal 
diocese of Cambrai and part of the region of the I. army corps 
(headquarters at Lille) and of the educational division of Lille. 
Its court of appeal is at Douai. The most noteworthy places 
are Lille, Cambrai, Douai, Dunkirk, Valenciennes and Anzin, 
Tourcoing, Roubaix, Avesnes, Halluin, Armentieres, Maubeuge, 
Conde-sur-Escaut, Fourmies, Hazebrouck, Gravelines, St Amand- 
les-Eaux, Bergues, Le Cateau, Comines, Denain, Cassel and 
Bavai, which are separately noticed. Other populous industrial 
towns not mentioned above are Loos (pop. 9294) and Haubourdin 
(7897) near Lille, Caudry (10,947), near Cambrai, and Aniche 
(7855), a coal mining centre, near Douai. Other places of interest 
are Bailleul (pop. in 1906, 7128), Bavai and Bergues, which have 
fine belfries of the 16th century, structures characteristic of the 
architecture of the department; Hondschoote, scene of a victory 
of the French over the allies in 1793, which has a church of the 
15th and 16th centuries with a fine tower and spire; and Famars 
which preserves a curious ruined stronghold of the period of the 
Roman occupation. 


NORDAU, MAX SIMON (1840- ), German author and 
philosopher, was born of Jewish parents at Budapest on the 
29th of July 1849. He studied medicine and travelled widely 
through Europe until 1878, when he settled down as a practitioner 
in his native town. In 1880 he removed to Paris, and in addition 
to his professional work took up the study of art, literature 
and social questions. His investigations were marked by a 
critical accuracy which endeavoured to weigh data and deduce 
results with a fearless disregard of conventional ideas. In his 
Entartung he applied the theory of physical degeneration to the 
intellectual side of civilized man, and endeavoured to show that 
in art, literature and social evolution there is decadence and 
hysteria; confused aesthetic theory, mysticism in thought, 
so-called " realism " in art, all alike indicate the vain spasmodic 
struggling of an effete civilization. In Die konventionellen 
Liigen der Kulturmenschheit (1884), the same destructive method 
is applied to politics and to social science. Yet Nordau was not 
a pessimist. In the Paradoxes psychologiqucs (1885) he expressed 
his profound and reasoned conviction that the " Degeneration " 
of the time was only temporary. This optimism was seen in his 
enthusiastic support of Dr Herzl's Zionist movement. In 
connexion with the British government's offer of land for a 
Jewish settlement in East Africa, there was a fundamental 
difference of opinion among the various Jewish societies. Herzl 
and Nordau were accused of giving up the idea of returning to 
Palestine, and substituting the African scheme. This idea 
provoked great hostility, and at a Zionist Ball in Paris (19th of 
December 1903) a Jew named Louban Chain Selik fired two shots 
at Nordau unsuccessfully. The outrage drew from Herzl a 
letter (The Times, 22nd of December) which clearly set forth the 
view held by himself and Nordau as to the ultimate destiny of 
the Zionist Movement. 

Works. — Novels and Stories: Seifenblasen, Federuidinungen 
und Geschichtcn (1879); Die Krankkeit des Jakrkunderts (1889); 
Geftihlskomddie (1892); Die Drohnenschlacht O897); Morganatisch 
(1904). Dramas: Die neuen Journalisten (in collaboration with 
F. Gross, 1880) ; Der Krieg der Millionen (1882) ; Das Recht zu lieben 
(2nd ed., 1894); Die Kugel (1894); and Doktor Kohn (1898). He 
published also Vom Krernl zur Alhambra (1880), an account of his 
travels, and three works descriptive of Paris and the Parisians — 
Pariser Studien aus dem wahren Milliardenlande (1878); Paris unter 
der dritten Republik (1881); Ausgewahlte Pariser Briej e (1887) ; 
two further volumes of criticism, Zeitgendssische Franzosen, literatur- 
geschichtliche essays (Berlin, 1901); and Von Kunst und Kiinstlern 
(Leipzig, 1905). 


NORDEN, JOHN (1548-1625?), English topographer, was the 
first Englishman who designed a complete series of county 
histories and geographies. His earliest known work of import- 
ance was the Speculum Britanniae, first part . . . Middlesex 
(1593); the MS. of this in the British Museum (Harl. 570) has 
corrections, &c, in Lord Burleigh's handwriting. In 1595 he 
wrote a Chorographical Description of . . . Middlesex , Essex, 
Surrey j Sussex, Hampshire, Wight, Guernsey and Jersey, dedicated 
to Queen Elizabeth; the MS. of this is in the British Museum, 
Addit. MSS. 31,853. In 1596 he published his Preparative 
to . . . Speculum Britanniae, dedicated to Burleigh, and in 1598 
his Hertfordshire (Lambeth Libr. MSS. 521). Before his death 
he had completed in manuscript his account of five other counties; 
three of these studies were printed long after his death, viz. 
Essex, edited for the Camden Society in 1840 by Sir Henry Ellis 
from a MS. at Hatfield (see also British Museum Addit. MSS. 
33, 7 6 9); Northamptonshire, known to have been finished in 
1610, but only published in 1720; Cornwall, likewise finished in 
1 610, published in 1728 (see Harl. MSS. 6252). Of Kent and 
Surrey even the MSS. are now lost; parts of the latter are perhaps 
identical with sections of the Chorographical Description of 1595. 
In 1600 Norden was appointed surveyor of the crown woods and 
forests in Berkshire, Devon, Surrey, &c; in 1605 he obtained 
the surveyorship of the duchy of Cornwall; in 1607, after a 
careful survey, he composed his valuable Description of the 
Honour of Windsor, with fine maps and plans in colour, dedicated 
to James I. (see Harl. MSS. 3749). In 1608 he was mainly 
occupied with the surveying of crown woods, especially in Surrey, 
Berkshire and Devon, and with the writing of his works on forest 
culture — Considerations touching . . . raising . . . of Coppices, 
and . . . Relation of . . . Proceedings upon . . . Commission 
concerning new forests, to which he added in 1613 his Observations 
concerning Crown Lands and Woods (see Egerton MSS. 806; 
Ashmole MSS. 1148; and Lansdowne MSS. 165). In 1612 
he was made surveyor of the royal castles in Kent, Surrey, 
Sussex, Hampshire, Berkshire, Dorset, Wiltshire, Somerset, 
Devon and Cornwall; in 1616 and 1617 he appears surveying 
the soke of Kirketon in Lindsey, as well as various manors and 
lands belonging to Prince Charles, afterwards Charles I. (see 
Cambridge University Library, Ff. iv. 30; London, British 
Museum Addit. MSS. 6027); his last works were a survey of 
Sheriff Hutton manor, Yorks, in 1624 (Harl. MSS. 6288), and 
England, an intended guide for English travellers, a series of tables 
to accompany Speed's county maps, executed in 1625, shortly 
before his death. 

Norden's maps of London and Westminster (in his Speculum 
Britanniae of 1593) are the best representations known of the English 
metropolis under the Tudors; his maps of Middlesex (also from the 
Spec. Brit, of 1593), of Essex (1594, 1840), of Hertfordshire (1598, 
1723) and of Cornwall (published in 1728; see above) are also note- 
worthy; in the last-named the roads are indicated for the first time 
in English topography. Norden also executed maps of Hampshire, 
Hertfordshire, Kent, Middlesex, Surrey and Sussex, for the fifth 
edition (1607) of Camden's Britannia, also maps of Middlesex, 
Essex, Sussex, Surrey and Cornwall for J. Speed (1610). Several 
important cartographical works of his are lost : e.g. his Map . . . of 
. . . Battles fought in England from . . . William the Conqueror to 
. . . Elizabeth, in 16 sheets, formerly in the Bodleian Gallery, Oxford, 
of which some part is probably preserved in the Invasions of England, 
an appendix to the Prospect of the most Famous Parts of the World, 
by J. Speed (1635); and his View of London, in 8 sheets, made c. 
1604-1606, and View of London Bridge, published in 1624; in the 
Crace collection at the British Museum is an earlier View of London 
by Norden (1600), and an 1804 reprint of the View of London Bridge; 
a map of Surrey by Norden, said to have been copied by Speed 
and Kip in Camden s Britannia of 1607, has also disappeared. 

Besides the works noticed above, see the accounts of Norden by 
C, Bateman in Speculum Britanniae, pars Cornwall (1728), and 
by Sir H. Ellis in Spec. Brit., pars Essex (Camden Society, 1840); 
also H. B. Wheatley in Harrison's Description of England (New 
Shakspere Society, 1877), and C. H. Coote's article in the Diet. 
Nat. Biog. (C. R. B.) 


NORDEN* a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Hanover, 4 m. from the North Sea and 20 m. by rail N. of 
Emden. Pop. (1905) 6717. It has a 16th-century town hall 
and its parish church was built in 1445. Gin, sugar, chocolate, 
yeast, beer, tobacco and machinery are manufactured. Nord- 
deich, a small port 4 m. N.W., is the shipping place for passengers 
bound for Norderney. Norden was first mentioned in 842. 


NORDENSKIOLD, NILS ADOLF ERIK, Baron (1832-1901), 
geographer and Arctic explorer, was born at Helsingfors, 18th 
November 1832. His ancestors came originally from Sweden, 
but for some generations had been settled in Finland. His 
father, Nils Gustav Nordenskiold, was both a mineralogist and 
a traveller. Nordenskiold entered the university of Helsingfors 
in 1849, and applied himself specially to chemistry and miner- 
alogy. In 1853 he accompanied his father to the Ural Moun tains 
and studied the iron and copper mines at Tagilsk. On his return 
he received minor appointments both at the university and the 
mining office, but an unguarded speech at a convivial entertain- 
ment in 1855 drew the attention of the Russian authorities 
to his political views, and led to his dismissal. He then visited 
Berlin, continuing his mineralogical studies, and in 1856 
obtained the Alexander travelling stipend at the university 
of Helsingfors and planned to expend it in geological research 
in Siberia and Kamchatka. Before starting he took his master's 
and doctor's degrees (1857), but he again aroused the suspicion 
of the authorities, so that he was forced to leave the country 
and was deprived of the right of ever holding office in the univer- 
sity. Settling at Stockholm he thenceforward became practically 
a Swedish citizen. He soon received an offer from Otto Torell, 
the geologist, to accompany him on an expedition to Spitsbergen. 
To the observations of Torell on glacial phenomena Norden- 
skiold added the discovery at Bell Sound of remains of Tertiary 
plants, and on the return of the expedition he received the 
appointment of professor and curator of the mineralogical 
department of the Swedish State Museum. In 1861 he took 
part in Torell *s second Spitsbergen expedition, which yielded 
even more important geological results. Of the further expedi- 
tion to the same quarter promoted by the Swedish academy 
of science in 1864, Nordenskiold was the leader. Three years 
later, chiefly through the support of the Swedish government 
and Oscar Dickson, who contributed largely towards the later 
expeditions of 1872 and 1875, he headed a well-organized 
expedition in the iron steamer " Sofia," and reached the highest 
northern latitude (8i° 42') then attained in the eastern hemi- 
sphere. Arctic exploration had now become his all-absorbing 
object in life, and in 1870, with three young naturalists, he 
visited the vast inland ice-sheet of Greenland. His next expedi- 
tion in 1872 did not answer expectation, for the tenders were 
caught in the ice, and the crews of the three vessels were forced 
to winter in Spitsbergen. In 1875-1876, however, a successful 
voyage eastwards, including the ascent of the Yenisei, led him 
to attempt the discovery of the long-sought North-East Passage. 
This he accomplished in the voyage of the " Vega," navigating 
for the first time the northern coasts of Europe and Asia. 
Starting from Karlskrona on the 22nd of June 1878, the " Vega " 
doubled Cape Chelyuskin in the following August, and after 
being frozen in at the end of September near Bering Strait, 
completed the voyage successfully in the following summer. 
He edited a monumental record of the expedition in five octavo 
volumes, and himself wrote a more popular summary in two 
volumes. 

On his return to Sweden he received an enthusiastic welcome*, 
and in April 1880 was made a baron and a commander of the 
Order of the Nordstjerna. In 1883 he again visited the east 
coast of Greenland, and succeeded in taking his ship through the 
great ice barrier, a feat attempted in vain during more than three 
centuries. Baron Nordenskiold also made a notable reputation 
in the field of historical geography by his Facsimile Atlas 
(1889) and Periplus (1897). The former contains reproductions 
of the most important geographical documents printed during 
the 15th and 16th centuries, and the latter, a work of far 
greater research, deals with the history of early cartography and 
the sailing charts in use among mariners during the middle ages. 
He died at Stockholm on the 12th of August 1901. 


NORDERNEY (i.e. " northern island "), an island of Germany, 
in the North Sea, the largest of the East Friesland group, 
belonging to the Prussian province of Hanover. Pop. (1905) 
3888. It is 8 m. long and about i| m. broad, and supports a 
seafaring and fishing population. It is reached by steamer 
from Geestemunde, Emden, Bremen or Hamburg, and at low 
tide by road from the mainland. The village at the S.W. end 
of the island is one of the most popular sea-bathing places 
in Germany, and is visited annually by some 26,000 visitors. 
On the S. side rises a lighthouse 175 ft. high, while the E. end 
of the island is filled with sand dunes ranging in height from 
50 to 75 ft. Norderney is immortalized by its association with 
Heinrich Heine's NordseebUder. 

See Berenberg, Das Nardseebad Norderney (Norden, 1895); 
C. Herquet, Geschichte der Insel Norderney 13Q8-1711 (1890); and 
the article Frisian Islands. 


NORDFJORD, an inlet of the west coast of Norway, penetrat- 
ing the land for 50 m t in an easterly direction, its mouth being 
115 m. by sea N. of Bergen (6i° 50' N.). No part of Norway 
affords finer scenery than the inner ramifications of this fjord 
among the snowy mountains of the northern Jostedalsbrae. 
Driving-roads penetrate the mountains from Visnaes eastward 
to the Gudbrandsdal, from Utvik southward to Vadheim on 
the Sogne Fjord, and from Faleide northward to Hellesylt 
(Geiranger Fjord) and Oje (Jorundsfjord). Nordfjordcid is a 
large village on the outer fjord, at the mouth of Hornindalen. 
Olden and Loen are other favourite centres on the inner part of 
the fjord. A small but powerful breed of horses is peculiar to 
the Nordfjord district. 


NORDHAUSEN, a town of Germany, in the province of 
Prussian Saxony. It is situated on the Zorge at the south base 
of the Harz Mountains, and at the west end of the Goldene Aue 
(Golden Plain), a fruitful valley watered by the Helme, 60 m. 
by rail W. of Halle, on the main line to Frankfort-on-Main and 
Cassel, and at the junction of railways to Erfurt and Blankenheim. 
Pop. (1885) 27,083; (1005) 29,882. It is built partly on the 
slope of the mountains and partly on the plain, and the upper 
and lower parts of the town are connected by flights of steps. 
Among its eight churches the most noteworthy are the Roman 
Catholic cathedral, late Gothic with a Romanesque crypt, and 
the Protestant church of St Blasius, containing two pictures 
by Lucas Cranach. Near the medieval town hall stands a 
Roland's column, the ancient symbol of free commercial inter- 
course and civic liberty. The town has a museum of antiquities 
and various public monuments, notably a fountain by Ernst 
Rietschel in the corn market, and another to Luther in the 
market square. There are statues of the emperor Frederick III. 
and of Prince Bismarck. The chief importance of the place 
arises from its distilleries, which annually yield about 10,000,000 
gallons of " Korn Schnapps," a spirit somewhat akin to whisky. 
The breweries are also important and there are manufactures 
of leather, tobacco and cigars, cotton, linen goods, carpets, 
chicory, malt and chemicals. Nordhausen is sometimes called 
the Cincinnati of Germany on account of its extensive export 
trade in pork, corned beef, ham and sausages. There is also a 
large trade in corn. 

Nordhausen is one of the oldest towns in North Germany. It 
possessed a royal palace in 874 and a convent was founded here 
in 962. It was destroyed by Henry the Lion, duke of Saxony, 
in 1180, but was soon rebuilt and was made a free imperial town 
in 1 253. In this and the following century several diets and other 
assemblies were held here. The protector (Vogl) of the town 
was the elector of Saxony and later for a few years (1702-17 15) 
the elector of Brandenburg. Nordhausen accepted the reformed 
doctrines in 1522. It was annexed by Prussia in 1803 and again 
in 1815, having in the meantime belonged to the kingdom of 
Westphalia. 

See Forstemann, Urkundlicke Geschichte der Stadt Nordhausen 
bis 1250 (Nordhausen, 1828-1840) and Kleine Schriften zur Geschichte 
der Stadt Nordhausen (Nordhausen, 1855); Lesser, Historische 
Nachrichten von Nordhausen, edited by Forstemann (Nordhausen 
i860); J. Schmidt, Bau- und Kunstdenkmaler der Stadt Nordhausen 
(Halle, 1886); T. Eckart, Gedenkbldtler aus der Geschichte der 
ehematigen freien Reichsstadt Nordhausen (Leipzig, 1895); Heine, 
Nordhausen und Preussen (Nordhausen, 1902}; and Girsehner, 
Lokaljuhrer fur Nordhausen und Umgebung (1891). 


NORDICA, LILIAN (1850- ), American operatic soprano, 
n$e Norton, was born at Fannin gton, Maine, and trained as a 
singer at Boston, and later at Milan. As Madame Nordica she 
made her operatic debut at Brescia in 1879, an d from that time 
took high rank among the prima donnas, appearing in all the 
principal capitals in Europe, and also in America. 


NORDIN, CARL GUSTAF (1740-1812), Swedish statesman, 
historian and ecclesiastic. In 1774 he was made docent of 
Gothic antiquities at Upsala University in consequence of his 
remarkable treatise, Monumenta svia-gothica vetustioris aevi 
falso meritoque suspecta. Summoned to Stockholm in 1782 by 
Gustavus III. to edit a Swedish Corpus diplomalicum, half an 
hour's private conversation with the young priest convinced 
Gustavus that Nordin's proper place was by his side in the 
political arena. But he employed Nordin quite differently from 
his episcopal colleague Olaf Wallqvist. While the bishop 
publicly defended the royal measures, Nordin became the king's 
private adviser. In politics Nordin was a royalist from pure 
conviction. To him a parliament seemed little better than a 
mob. He was one of the king's secret managers during the 
troublesome and dangerous riksdag of 1789, but advised caution 
and compared the estate of clergy, which at one time held the 
balance between the jarring orders, to ice which might be walked 
upon but could not be driven over. He was appointed a member 
of an ecclesiastical commission for reforming the church in 1787, 
in which capacity he was virtually minister of public worship. 
In 1 791-1792 he became a leading member of the financial and 
general committees of the riksdag. After the king's death 
Nordin shared in the general disgrace of the Gustavians and 
lived in retirement at the little town of Hernosand, where he 
held the post of lector at the gymnasium. But he reappeared 
prominently on the political scene during the riksdag of 1800, 
and in 1805 was consecrated bishop of Hernosand. Though he 
lacked the brilliant qualities of his rival Wallqvist, Nordin had 
the same alertness and penetration, and was infinitely more 
stable and disinterested. One of the most learned men of his 
day, he devoted his spare time to history, and discovered that 
many of the oldest and most cherished Scandinavian MSS. were 
clever forgeries. Like Jean Hardouin he got to believe that a 
great deal of what is called classical literature was compiled by 
anonymous authors at a much later date, and he used frequently 
to startle his colleagues, the Gustavian academicians, by his 
audacious paradoxes. 

He left behind him a colossal collection of MSS., the so-called 
Nardinska Samlingarna, which were purchased and presented to 
Upsala university by Charles XIV. and form the groundwork of the 
well-known Scriptares rerum Suecicarum medii aevi. Nordin pub- 
lished during his lifetime Handlingar till uplysning af svenska krigs- 
historien (Stockholm, 1787-1788). His academical addresses came 
out at Stockholm in 1818 under the title Minnen dfver namnkunniga 
svenska man. His Dagbak did not appear till 1868. 

See Sveriees historia (Stockholm, 1877, &c), vol. v. ; C. T. Odhner, 
Sveriges politiska historia under Gustaf IIL's regering (Stockholm, 
1885, &c.) ; R. N. Bain, Gustavus III. vol. 2 (London, 1896). 


NORDLINGEN, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Bavaria, 
on the Eger, 40 m. N. of Augsburg by rail and at the junction 
of lines to Buchloe and Dombuhl. Pop. (1005) 8512. It was 
formerly a free imperial town, owning a territory 35 sq. m. in 
extent, and is still surrounded with walls and towers. The 
Evangelical church of St George is a Gothic structure erected 
in the 15th century and restored in 1880. It has paintings by 
Hans Schaufelein, who was a native of Nordlingen, and a tower 
290 ft. high. The Late Gothic town hall has a collection of 
pictures and antiquities. The chief manufactures of the town 
are linen goods, soap, malt, and agricultural implements, and a 
brisk trade is carried on in cattle, grain and geese. From 898, 
when first mentioned, to 1215 Nordlingen was subject to the 
bishops of Regensburg, but about 121 5 it became a free city of 
the Empire. It was annexed to Bavaria in 1803. 

Nordlingen was the scene of two great battles in the Thirty 
Years' War (q.v.). In the first, which was fought on the 5th and 
6th of September 1634, the hitherto invincible Swedish army, 
commanded by Duke Bernhard of Saxe Weimar and Marshal 
Horn, was defeated with great loss by a somewhat superior 
army of Imperialists and Spaniards under General Gallas, Horn 
and 3000 men being made prisoners and 6000 killed or mortally 
wounded. In the second battle, fought eleven years later 
(3rd August 1645), Conde (then duke of Enghien) and Turenne 
were the leaders on the one side, and Mercy and Johann von 
Weert, the dashing cavalry commander whose onset had decided 
the battle of 1634, on the other. The Germans were posted 
some 5 m. to the east of Nordlingen, about Allerheim, with their 
right resting on a hill and the left on a castle, the guns with an 
infantry escort being placed on these points, and the village 
itself in the centre being also garrisoned and entrenched. In 
rear of the village the plain was occupied by Mercy's army in the 
customary two lines, foot in the centre, horse in the wings. The 
French army, similarly arrayed, but with a few battalions 
attached to the cavalry wings, was more heterogeneous than the 
German, being composed of French, Hessian, German mercen- 
aries, and Liegeois. After a cannonade in which it suffered 
more severely than its entrenched enemy, the French centre, 
furiously attacked the village of Allerheim; the fighting here 
was very heavy, and on the whole in favour of the Germans, 
although Mercy was killed. The right wing of the French 
cavalry was swept off the field by Johann von Weert 's charge, 
but the German troopers, intoxicated with success, dispersed 
to plunder. On the French left, meanwhile, Turenne saved the 
day. Fighting cautiously at first with his leading line to gain 
time for his second to come up, he then charged and broke up 
the hostile right wing of cavalry, while some battalions of infantry 
scaled the hill and captured the Bavarian guns. Unlike Weert 
the marshal kept his troops in hand, and swung round upon the 
Bavarian infantry behind Allerheim, who were at the same time 
cannonaded by their lost guns. A prolonged fight now ensued, 
in which the Bavarians had the worst of it, and Weert, returning 
at last to the field, dared not attempt to engage afresh. The 
armies faced one another all night with their sentries fifty paces 
apart, but in the morning the Bavarians were found to have 
retreated. Nothing was gained by the victors but the trophies 
and the field of battle, and the losses of both sides had been 
enormous. Enghien had only 1500 of his foot in hand next day. 
Nordlingen, therefore, is a classical instance of the unprofitable 
and costly bataille rangSe of the 17th century. 

See Beyschlag, Geschichte der Stadt Nordlingen (Nordlingen, 1851), 
and Mayer, Die Stadt Nordlineen, ihr Leben und ihre Kunst im Lichte 
der Vorzeit (Nordlingen, 1856). 


NORE, THE, a sandbank at the mouth of the river Thames, 
England, marked by various buoys and by a lightship, with 
revolving light. This ship lies 3 m. from the nearest point on 
the Kent coast, about the same distance from the Essex coast, 
and 47 J m. below London Bridge. The first light was placed here 
as an experiment by Mr Hamblin, its patentee, in 1731. In 
1797 the neighbouring anchorage was the scene of a mutiny in 
the British fleet then lying here, well known in history as the 
Mutiny of the Nore. 

NORFOLK, EARLS AND DUKES OF. The 1st earl of Norfolk 
was Ralph de Guader, a follower of William the Conqueror, 
who forfeited the earldom when he revolted against William 
( in 1075; the 2nd was Hugh Bigod (d. 1177), one of Stephen's 
supporters, to whom the earldom was granted by this king 
before 1141. Hugh's grandson, Hugh (d. 1225), the 3rd earl 
of this line, married Matilda, daughter of William Marshal, 
earl of Pembroke, and from the Marshals their son Roger 
(d. 1270), the 4th earl, inherited the office of marshal of 
England. This powerful family of Bigod retained the 
earldom until Roger, the 5th earl, died childless in December 
1306. 

The next earl of Norfolk was Thomas of Brotherton (1300- 
1 33&)> a younger son of Edward I., to whom the earldom was 
granted in 13 12 by his half-brother, Edward II. In addition 
to the estates which had formerly belonged to the Bigods Thomas 
received the office of marshal. He joined Queen Isabella when 
she landed in England in 1326, and was one of the group of 
nobles who brought about the deposition of Edward II. He 
died in August 1338, leaving no son. The survivor of his two 
daughters, Margaret (c. 1320-1400), who was countess of Norfolk 
in her own right, married John de Segrave, 3rd Lord Segrave 
(d. 1353), and their only child Elizabeth (d. c. 1375) became 
the wife of John de Mowbray, 4th Lord Mowbray (d. 1368), 
and the mother of two sons John and Thomas, In 1397 the 
countess Margaret was created duchess of Norfolk, and at the 
same time her grandson Thomas Mowbray was made duke of 
Norfolk. 

Thomas Mowbray, 1st duke of Norfolk (c. 1366-1399), 
became Baron Mowbray and Baron Segrave when his elder 
brother John died in February 1382; about the same 
time Richard II. created him earl of Nottingham, f^ t bray 
a title held by his dead brother, and in 1385 made him 
marshal of England for life. For some years he enjoyed the 
favour and companionship of the king, but differences arose 
between them, and in 1387 Nottingham began to act with 
Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, his own brother-in- 
law, Richard Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, and the party of nobles 
who wished to deprive the king of his power. They routed the 
royal favourite Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, at Radcot 
Bridge, and Richard was at their mercy. Owing partly to 
Nottingham's moderate counsels the suggestion to depose him 
was not carried out, but in the " merciless parliament " of 1388 
his favourites were " appealed " of treason and were sentenced 
to death. For nearly two years the chief power was in the hands 
of the lords appellant, as Nottingham and his friends were 
called, but in 1389 the king regained his authority. He detached 
Nottingham from his colleagues and made him warden of the 
Scottish marches; later he became captain of Calais and the 
royal lieutenant in the north-east of France. Richard took 
him to Ireland in 1394 and soon afterwards sent him to arrange 
a peace with France and his marriage with Isabella, daughter 
of King Charles VI. But the earFs supreme service to the king 
was in 1397 when Richard took a tardy but severe vengeance 
upon three of the appellants. In their turn these lords were 
" appealed " of treason before the parliament, and as on the 
former occasion Nottingham was one of the accusers. He was 
present when Gloucester was arrested at Pleshey, and Froissart 
says that he actually beheaded Arundel himself. Gloucester 
was entrusted to his keeping at Calais, and in September 1397 
he reported that his prisoner was dead. The duke had been 
murdered, and Nottingham was probably responsible, although 
the evidence against him is not conclusive. As a reward he 
received most of Arundel's lands in Surrey and Sussex, and was 
created duke of Norfolk. He now began to fear for his own 
safety, and took the duke of Hereford, afterwards King Henry 
IV., into his confidence. Hereford carried his words to the king, 
who summoned him to his presence, and at Oswestry Norfolk 
accused Hereford of speaking falsely. A court of chivalry 
decided that the dispute should be referred to the arbitrament 
of single combat and Coventry was the place appointed for the 
duel; but when on the 16th of September 1398 everything was 
ready for the fight Richard interposed and ordered both com- 
batants into banishment. Norfolk was deprived of his offices, 
but not of his titles; his " heavier doom " was exile for life, and 
he was ordered to confine himself to Germany, Hungary and 
Bohemia. At once he left England for Dordrecht, and after 
passing some months in wanderings he reached Venice, where he 
died on the 22nd or 27th of September 1399. The concluding 
scene of the duke's life in England forms the staple material of 
act i. of Shakespeare's Richard II. Norfolk left estates in nearly 
all the English counties. His wife was Elizabeth (c. 1372-1425), 
daughter of Richard Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, by whom he 
had two sons, Thomas and John, and two daughters. 

His elder son, Thomas Mowbray (1385-1405), became earl 
of Nottingham and earl marshal on his father's death, but he 
was not allowed to assume the title of duke of Norfolk. He 
quarrelled with Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, over the 
precedence of their respective earldoms, and left the court in 
anger when Henry IV. decided in favour of Warwick. At this 
time (1405) Richard le Scrope, archbishop of York, and other 
northern potentates were preparing to rise- against the king. 
The earl marshal joined them, was taken prisoner at Shipton 
Moor, and was beheaded at York on the 8th of June 1405. 

John Mowbray (1390-1432), 2nd duke, brother of the last- 
named, now became earl marshal and earl of Nottingham. He 
sat in judgment upon Richard, earl of Cambridge, and the other 
rebels in 1415, and went to France with Henry V. He took part 
in the siege of Harfleur, but illness prevented him from fighting 
at Agincourt. He saw service in France in subsequent years, and 
after Henry's death he was a member of the English governing 
council. In 1424 he followed Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, on 
his campaign in Hainaut, and in 1425 he secured his recognition 
as duke of Norfolk. He died on the 10th of October 1432 at 
Epworth, where his father had founded a Cistercian priory. 
By his wife Catherine, daughter of Ralph Neville, 1st earl of 
Westmorland, he left an only son, the 3rd duke. 

John Mowbray, 3rd duke (1415-1461), became warden of 
the Scottish marches; he also served as a soldier and an 
ambassador in France. Upon the outbreak of the fierce rivalry 
between the houses of York and Lancaster about 1450 he joined 
Richard, duke of York, to whom he was related; he aided. the 
Yorkist cause in Norfolk and in London, and it was he who 
in November 1453 demanded an inquiry into the administration 
of Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset. In 1459 he appeared on 
the Lancastrian side and took the oath of allegiance to Henry VI. 
and to his son Edward at Coventry, but soon he was again 
figuring as an active Yorkist. He was a member of the deputa- 
tion which in March 1461 asked the duke of York (Edward IV.) to 
take the crown, and he fought at the second battle of St Albans 
and also'at Towton, where one authority says he saved the day 
for the Yorkists. 

John Mowbray, 4th duke (1444-1476), who had already been 
created earl of Surrey,. a title formerly held by his ancestors, 
the Fitzalans, was the only son of the preceding. The names 
both of John and of his father appear frequently in the Paston 
Letters, as both dukes in turn seized Caister castle, which had 
been left by Sir John Fastolf to John Paston, and the 4th duke 
held it against the Pastons for some years. On his death in 1476 
the dukedom became extinct, but the earldom passed to his 
daughter Anne (1472-1481), who married Richard, duke of York, 
the younger son of Edward IV. Richard was created duke of 
Norfolk and made earl marshal, but when he was murdered in 
1483 the dukedom again became extinct, the earldom having 
reverted to the crown on the death of Anne. 

The illustrious family of Howard (?.».), members of which 
have been dukes of Norfolk from 1483 to the present 
day, with the exception of two periods during which 
the title was forfeited, was connected with the family 
of Mowbray. 

John Howard, 1st duke of Norfolk (c. 143 0-148 5), was 
the son of Sir Robert Howard by his wife Margaret, daughter of 
Thomas Mowbray, the first duke of that family. In 1455 John 
Howard was sent to parliament as member for Norfolk, although 
he " hadde no lyvelode in the shire "; in 146 1 he was knighted; 
and in 1470, although he appears to have been a consistent 
Yorkist, he was created a baron by Henry VI. He was treasurer 
of the royal household from 1467 to 1474, and went to France 
with Edward IV. in 1475. After Edward's death, however, 
he supported Richard III., who created him duke of Norfolk 
and made him earl marshal of England in June 1483. He was 
killed at Bosworth whilst fighting for this king on the 22nd of 
August 1485, and the title thus suffered attainder. He is 
frequently mentioned in the Paston Letters. 

	Howard  line. 

His son, Thomas Howard, afterwards 2nd duke (1443-1524), 
shared his father's fortunes; he fought at Barnet for Edward IV. 
and was made steward of the royal household and created earl 
of Surrey in 1483. Taken prisoner at Bosworth he was attainted 
and remained in captivity until January 1489, when he was 
released and restored to his earldom but not to the dukedom 
of Norfolk. He was then entrusted with the maintenance of 
order in Yorkshire and with the defence of the Scottish borders; 
he was made lord treasurer and a privy councillor in 1501, 
and he helped to arrange the marriage between Margaret, the 
daughter of Henry VII., and James IV. of Scotland. Henry 
VIII., too, employed him on public business, but the earl grew 
jealous of Wolsey, and for a short time he absented himself 
from court. He commanded the army which defeated the Scots 
at Flodden in September 1513, and was created duke of Norfolk 
in February of the following year, with precedency as of the 
creation of 1483. In his later years Norfolk worked more 
harmoniously with Wolsey. He was guardian of England 
during Henry's absence in France in 1520, and he acted as 
lord high steward at the trial of his friend Edward Stafford, 
duke of Buckingham, in 1521. Among his sons were William, 
1st Lord Howard of Effingham, and Sir Edward Howard (c. 1477- 
1513)* lord nigh admiral, who defeated the French fleet off 
Brest in August 1512, and lost his life during another engagement 
in April 1 513. 

Thomas Howard, 3rd duke (i473~i554), eldest son of the 
2nd duke, married in 1495 Ann e (1475-1512), daughter of Edward 
IV., thus becoming a brother-in-law of Henry VII., who had 
married Anne's sister Elizabeth. He became lord high admiral 
in 1513, and led the van of the English army at Flodden in 
September, being created earl of Surrey in February 1514. In 
1513 he took for his second wife Elizabeth (d. 1558), daughter 
of Edward Stafford, duke of Buckingham. In 1520 Surrey 
went to Ireland as lord-deputy, but soon vacated this post to 
command the troops which sacked Morlaix and ravaged the 
neighbourhood of Boulogne in 1522; afterwards he raided and 
devastated the south of Scotland. He succeeded his father 
in May 1524, and as the most powerful nobleman in England he 
headed the party hostile to Cardinal Wolsey. He favoured the 
divorce of Henry VIII. from Catherine of Aragon, and the 
king's marriage with his niece Anne Boleyn. In 1529 he became 
president of the council, but in a few years his position was shaken 
by the fate of Anne Boleyn, at whose trial and execution he 
presided as lord high steward. But his military abilities rendered 
him almost indispensable to the king, and in 1536, just after 
the rising known as the Pilgrimage of Grace had broken out, 
he was despatched into the north of England; he temporized 
with the rebels until the danger was past, and then, as the first 
president of the council of the north, punished them with great 
severity. Sharing in the general hatred against Thomas Crom- 
well, Norfolk arrested the minister in June 1540. He led the 
English army into Scotland in 1542 and into France in 1544; 
but the execution of Catherine Howard, another of his nieces 
who had become the wife of the king, had weakened his position. 
His son Henry Howard, earl of Surrey {q.v.) } was arrested on a 
charge of treason; Norfolk .himself suffered the same fate as 
accessory to the crime. In January 1547 Surrey was executed; 
his father was condemned to death by a bill of attainder, but 
owing to the death of the king the sentence was not carried out. 
Norfolk remained in prison throughout the reign of Edward VI., 
but in August 1553 he was released and restored to his dukedom. 
Again taking command of the English army he was sent to 
suppress the rebellion which had broken out under Sir Thomas 
Wyat, but his men fled before the enemy. He acted as lord high 
steward! at the trial of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland; 
and he died on the 25th of August 1554. Norfolk was a brutal 
and licentious man, but was a supporter of the Roman church, 
being, as he himself admits, " quick against the sacramentaries." 
As a soldier he was serviceable to Henry VIII., but as a diplo- 
matist he was a failure, being far inferior to Wolsey and to 
Cromwell. He had two sons, Henry, earl of Surrey, and Thomas 
(c. 1528-1582), who in 1559 was created Viscount Howard of 
Bindon, a title which became extinct in i6ri. His only daughter 
Mary (d. 1557) married Henry, duke of Richmond, the natural 
son of Henry VIII. 

Thomas Howard, 4th duke (1536-1572), son of Henry Howard, 
earl of Surrey, was born on the 10th of March 1536. His tutor 
was John Foxe, the martyrologist. Soon after Elizabeth 
became queen in 1558 she sent the young duke to take part in 
the war against the Scots and their French allies, but the conclu- 
sion of the treaty of Edinburgh in July 1560 enabled him to 
return to the court in London. Having married and lost three 
wives, all ladies of wealth and position, Norfolk was regarded 
as a suitable husband for Mary queen of Scots, who had just taken 
refuge in England. He presided over the commission appointed 
by Elizabeth to inquire into the relations between the Scottish 
queen and her subjects; and although he appears to have 
believed in Mary's guilt he was anxious to marry her. Among 
the Scots Maitland of Lethington favoured the proposed union; 
Mary herself consented to it; but Norfolk was unwilling to 
take up arms, and while he delayed Elizabeth ordered his arrest 
and he was taken to prison in October 1569. In August 1570, 
after the suppression of the rising in the north of England, the 
duke was released; but he entered into communication with 
Philip II. of Spain regarding the proposed invasion of England 
by the Spaniards. After some hesitation Norfolk placed himself 
at the head of the conspirators; and in return for his services 
he asked the king of Spain " to approve of my own marriage with 
the Queen of Scots." But the plot failed; Norfolk's treachery 
was revealed to Lord Burghley, and in September 1571 he was 
arrested. He was beheaded on the 2nd of June 1572. It is 
noteworthy that he always regarded himself as a Protestant. 
Norfolk's first wife, Mary (1540-1557), daughter and heiress 
of Henry Fitzalan, 12th earl of Arundel, bore him a son, Philip, 
who in consequence of his father's attainder was not allowed 
to succeed to the dukedom of Norfolk, but became 13th earl of 
Arundel in succession to his maternal grandfather in 1580. 
Norfolk left two other sons, Thomas Howard, created earl of 
Suffolk in r6o3, and Lord William Howard (q.v.). 

In 1660 the dukedom was restored by act of parliament to 
Thomas Howard, 4th earl of Arundel (1627-1677), a descendant 
of the 4th duke. The 5th duke was succeeded by his brother 
Henry (1628-1684), the friend of John Evelyn, who had been 
already created earl of Norwich; in 1672 he was made earl 
marshal, and this dignity was entailed on his male heirs. 

Charles Howard, nth duke (1746-1815), was the son of 
Charles Howard (1720-1786), who succeeded his cousin, Edward 
Howard (1686-1777), as 10th duke of Norfolk in 1777, and who 
wrote Historical Anecdotes of some of the Howard Family (1769 
and 1817). Born in March i746,the earl of Surrey, as Charles 
was called from 1777 until he became duke of Norfolk in 1786, 
represented Carlisle in the House of Commons, where he acted 
with the Whigs; unlike his father he was a Protestant. In 1780 
he was a lord of the treasury. In 1789 at a dinner held in 
London the duke gave the toast " Our sovereign's health — the 
majesty of the people "; this greatly offended George III., who 
deprived him of some of his public offices. 

When he died on the 16th of December i8r5 he left no sons, 
and the dukedom passed to his kinsman, Bernard Edward 
Howard (1 765-1842), a descendant of the 4th duke. 

Bernard's only son, Henry Charles Howard (1791-1856), 
became 13th duke in 1842. As earl of Surrey he was the first 
Roman Catholic since the Reformation to sit in the House of 
Commons, of which he was a member from r829 to i84r; as 
duke of Norfolk he was master of the horse from 1846 to r852 
and lord steward from 1853 to 1854. The second of his three 
sons, Edward George Fitzalan (i8r8-i883), was a member of the 
House of Commons from 1848 to 1868, and was created Baron 
Howard of Glossop in 1869. Lord Howard rendered great 
service to the cause of Roman Catholic education. 

The 13th duke's eldest son, Henry Granville Fitzalan 
Howard (r8i 5-1860), succeeded to the title. He was a devoted 
Roman Catholic, left the Liberal party and resigned his seat in 
parliament rather than support the Ecclesiastical Titles Bill of 
1850. He edited the Lives of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, 
and of Anne Dacres, his wife (1857 and 1861). He was suc- 
ceeded by his son Henry Fitzalan Howard, 15th duke (b. 1847), 
who was postmaster-general from 1895 to 1900, first Lord Mayor 
of Sheffield in 1895, went out to the South African War in 1900, 
and whose position as head of the English Roman Catholics 
and as premier duke and Earl Marshal made him for many 
years conspicuous in public life. His only son by his first wife, 
a daughter of Baron Donington, died in early life; but by his 
second marriage (1904) to the daughter and heiress of Lord 
Herries he had a son born in 1908. 

NORFOLK, an eastern county of England, bounded N. and 
E. by the North Sea, S.E. and S. by Suffolk and W. by Cam- 
bridgeshire and Lincolnshire. The area is 2044-4 sq. m., the 
county being the fourth in size in England. The surface falls 
into two divisions. The eastern and central portions consist 
of an undulating plain with rising ground skirting the river 
valleys and low chalk downs in the north. For the most part this 
section is fertile and well wooded, but there are some expanses 
of heath land. The principal rivers are the Yare and its tribu- 
taries the Wen sum, Bure and Waveney, the last forming a 
large part of the boundary with Suffolk. In the west the county 
includes part of the Fen country (q.v.), where the principal 
rivers are the Great Ouse and its tributaries the Little Ouse or 
Brandon river, which also forms part of the Suffolk boundary, 
the Wissey and the Nar. The flat fens are crossed by innumer- 
able drainage channels. They are comprised within that 
portion of the whole district known as the Bedford Level, and 
extend from Welney and Hilgay Fens near the junction of the 
Great and Little Ouse northward to the Wash. 

The watershed is nearly in the centre of the county. The 
middle eastern portion is a low-lying fiat area lifted slightly 
towards the coast in such a way that some of the tributary 
streams of the Bure rise very near the sea but flow at first inland 
or parallel to the coast. Here occur the well-known Norfolk' 
Broads, shallow meres, having their low banks massed with 
luxuriant reeds and other water-plants, and possessing much 
quiet beauty of an individual character. Most of them abound 
with pike, bream and other coarse fish, and harbour innumerable 
waterfowl, including the water-hen, heron, bittern, king-fisher, 
mallard, teal and snipe. They are thus frequented by sports- 
men, but still more by boating parties, and at Yarmouth, 
Wroxham Bridge, Acle and elsewhere sailing boats with cabins, 
and other boats, are hired in large numbers. Annual regattas 
are held on several Broads. The Broads are generally not 
widenings of the main river, but are connected with it by short 
channels. Their formation is probably due to a slight uprising 
of the land, whereupon the depressions in the undulated surface 
continued to carry water. The average depth of the Broads is 
only some eight feet, and their tendency is to become choked 
with sedges and bulrushes and to decrease in size. The Bure 
joins the Yare at Yarmouth, at the seaward end of Breydon 
Water, which does not rank among the Broads. Following the 
Bure upwards, a small stream is found uniting it with Filby, 
Rollesby and Ormsby Broads to the north, which form one 
sheet of water of irregular shape. The Thurne stream then 
enters from the same direction, draining Heigham Sound, 
Hickling Broad, Horsey Mere and Martham Broad. The second 
of these is the largest of all, measuring some 3 m. in length by 
one at its widest part. The next tributary, the Ant, drains 
Barton *and Stalham Broads. Closely adjoining the upper Bure 
itself, there are Ranworth Broad, Horning Broad, and Salhouse, 
Hoveton and Wroxham Broads almost adjoining. South of 
Ranworth, on a tributary, is South Walsham Broad. Adjacent 
to the Yare towards Norwich is Rockland Broad. Between the 
Waveney and Lowestoft Oulton Broad is formed (in Suffolk; 
see Lowestoft). 

Nearly two-thirds of the boundary of the county is formed by 
tidal water. There are few bays or inlets, and on the northern 
coast no river mouths. For the most part the coast-line is fiat 
and low, and has been greatly encroached on by the sea, several 
villages having been engulfed since the Conquest. From the 
mouth of the Yare to Happisburgh the shore is skirted by sand- 
banks. Thence for 20 m. it is formed of cliffs consisting of clay 
and masses of embedded rocks, the average height being 
about 50 ft., although in some cases an altitude of 200 ft. is 
reached. These cliffs are succeeded by a low shingly or sandy 
coast stretching as far as St Edmund's Point. The shores of the 
Wash are formed of mudbanks, which are left dry at low water. 
West of Lynn a considerable extent of land has been reclaimed 
from the sea in modern times, and farther south an old Roman 
embankment stretches into Lincolnshire. At various points off 
the coast there are submarine forests, especially in Brancaster 
Bay and in the neighbourhood of Cromer and Happisburgh. 
Fossilized remains of large mammals are sometimes dragged 
up by the nets of fishermen, and mammoth tusks measuring 
from 6 to 9 ft. have been found at Knole Sand off Happisburgh. 
The fine sandy beaches and healthy climate have contributed 
to the growth of such popular watering-places as Cromer, 
Yarmouth and Hunstanton, while Mundesley and Wells-next- 
the-Sea are lesser resorts. 

Geology. — The prevailing rock formation in Norfolk is the Chalk, 
which occupies a broad tract in the central and western portions of 
the county and underlies the Tertiary deposits in the eastern part, 
the general dip of the rocks being towards that direction. Pliocene 
beds predominate in the eastern third of the county; while a narrow 
belt of Lower Cretaceous and Jurassic rocks lies along the western 
border. Oxford Clay and Corallian beds have been proved by boring 
at Lynn, but the oldest formation to appear at the surface is the 
Kimeridge Clay, which stretches along the coast of the Wash from 
Hunstanton to King's Lynn and south to Dov/nham, where it has 
been'dug for bricks and tiles. The Lower Greensand, which forms the 
picturesque escarpment overlooking the Fen-land and the Wash, is 
represented in its upper part by the brown, iron-stained sandstone, the 
Carstone (up to 40 ft.), locally known as the " Gingerbread stone," 
which is quarried at Snettisham and elsewhere as a building stone. 
Below the Carstone are the Snettisham Clay beds, dug for brick- 
making at that village and at Dersingham and Heacham; these 
pass southwards into sandstones and ironstones. The lowest division 
of the Greensand, the Sandringham beds, highly-coloured sands and 
sandstones, are exposed at Sandringham Warren, Downham Market 
and Grimston Common. Overlying the Lower Greensand is the Gault 
Clay which extends from Shouldnam northwards to Dersingham, 
where it begins to change in character and finally passes into the 
Red Chalk {a ft.), so conspicuous in the cliffs at Hunstanton. In the 
same cliffs tne Lower Chalk is exposed resting on the Red Chalk 
(which does not belong to the Chalk proper but the Gault); it is a 
hard grey or white limestone; at Marham and other places it is 
quarried for building and for lime. The Middle Chalk (about 300 ft.), 
with flints in the upper part and occasional marl beds, is exposed at 
Docking, Hillington and Methwold. The Upper Chalk (about 800 
ft.) is much softer, with many flints, including the peculiar forms 
known as " paramoudras "; it has been largely exploited for lime 
and whiting, and the flints have been worked from prehistoric times. 
Dressed flints are still used for facing walls in churches and other 
buildings. At Trimingham occurs the highest horizon of the Chalk 
known in England. Eocene strata, Reading Beds (46 ft.) and London 
Clay (310 ft.) have been proved to lie beneath younger deposits at 
Yarmouth. Pliocene deposits, sands, gravels and clays are exposed 
along the coast from Weybourne and Cromer to Happisburg and in 
the river valleys over most of the eastern part of the country. The 
lower subdivision, the Norwich Crag Series (25-100 ft.), exhibits 
numerous local peculiarities to which distinctive names have been 
applied, as the Fluvio-Marine beds " of Bramerton and Thorpe, 
the " mammaliferous crag," the " Weybourne Crag " and the 
14 Chillesford Clays," &c. The upper subdivision, the Cromer Forest- 
Bed (10-30 ft.), contains the bones of the mammoth, rhinoceros, 
giant beaver, sabre-toothed tiger and many others, as well as the 
transported stumps of trees. Next in order come the glacial clays, 
sands and gravels, which cover and obscure so much of the older 
stratified rocks of the county and hence greatly influence the scenery. 
There is a lower " till " with boulders and an upper chalky boulder 
clay, sometimes with sands and gravels between; glacial gravels 
overlie the clays in large sheets asat Norwich, Mousehold Heath, 
Dereham, Fakenham. The drift is thicker in the east than in the 
west — very interesting exposures occur on the cliffs about Cromer. 
Later valley gravels occupy some of the stream courses, and among 
the more recent deposits are^the Fen beds and blown sands. 

Climate and Agriculture. — On account of the exposed position 
of the coast to east and north-east winds, the climate, especially 
in winter and early spring, is much colder than in the adjacent 
counties. The air is, however, generally dry, and unhealthy 
fogs are not common, except in the marshy districts. The 
cynd is a characteristic mist which sometimes rolls up like 
smoke from the sea over the eastern parts. Norfolk contains a 
greater variety of soil than any other county in England. In the 
north and west the soil is generally chalky; towards the south- 
east it is a light sand, assuming occasionally the form of blowing 
sand, but elsewhere capable of cultivation and of average 
fertility. In the centre and east the prevailing soil is loam, 
chiefly light and workable, but sometimes composed of stiff 
chalky boulder clay. Alluvial clays and loams occur on the 
borders of Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire, and stretch along 
the river valleys. The marsh lands along the coast are subject 
to inundation, but afford capital pasturage. Fanning is in an ad- 
vanced condition, and, by means of draining, subsoil ploughing, 
&c, excellent crops are raised. The farms are for the most part 
large and the farm buildings superior. About four-fifths of the 
total area is under cultivation. Of this area corn crops occupy 
some two-fifths and consist mainly of wheat and barley, but in 
the production of oats also Norfolk is one of the first counties in 
England. As much attention is paid to the grazing of cattle 
and to the rearing and fattening of sheep, turnips and swedes 
are extensively grown. Large numbers of lean cattle, princi- 
pally Irish shorthorns, are brought into the county mainly for 
winter grazing. The old Norfolk polled stock is recognized as a 
distinct breed. Good pasture lands are found in many districts 
of the county, especially along the river-beds and near the fens. 
A large acreage is under beans and a fair quantity of small 
fruit is grown. 

Other Industries. — At an early period Norfolk was one of the 
principal seats of the cloth trade in England, worsted deriving 
its name from having been first manufactured at Worstead. 
The weaving of silk and wool is still carried on at Norwich and 
also shawl weaving, although the staple trade of the town is 
now boots and shoes. Silk is also manufactured at Yarmouth, 
Wymondham and North Walsham. Flour-mills -are numerous 
all over the county, and there are agricultural implement works 
at Norwich, Lynn, Thetford, East Harling, North Walsham t 
Walsingham, and East Dereham. Lime-burning, brick-making, 
tanning, malting and brewing are carried on in various districts. 
There are extensive mustard and starch works at Norwich. 
One of the chief hindrances to commercial progress is the danger- 
ous nature of the sea-coast, and the lack of harbours. A large 
trade, however, is carried on at Yarmouth. The other principal 
port is Lynn, and there is a small trade at Cromer and Wells. 

Railway communication is provided principally by the Great 
Eastern railway, the Drincipal lines of which are those from London 
and Ipswich to Norwich and Yarmouth, from Ely to Norwich and 
Yarmouth, Ely to Lynn, Lynn to Swaffham and Dereham, Norwich 
to Dereham and Wells and Norwich to Cromer. There are numerous 
branch lines. The Midland & Great Northern joint line, from Lynn, 
serves Cromer, Norwich, North Walsham and Yarmouth. The 
eastern rivers afford water communication with the port of Yar- 
mouth and the Great and Little Ouse, with many of the drainage- 
cuts which are navigable, with Lynn. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the ancient 
county is 1,308,439 acres, with a population in 1891 of 454, 516, 
and in 1001 of 460,120. The area of the administrative county 
is 1,314,612. The county contains 33 hundreds. The municipal 
boroughs are — King's Lynn (pop. 20,288); Norwich, a city and 
county borough and the county town (1 1 1 ,733) ; Thetford 
(4613); and Yarmouth, properly Great Yarmouth, a county 
borough (51,316). The urban districts are Cromer (3781), 
Diss (3745), Downham Market (2472), East Dereham (5545), 
Hunstanton (1893), North Walsham (3981), Sheringham (2359), 
Swaffham (3371), Walsoken (3250), Wells-next-the-Sea (2494). 
Among other towns may be mentioned Fakenham (2907), Holt 
(1844), Wymondham (4733). The county is in the south- 
eastern circuit, and assizes are held at Norwich. There are two 
courts of quarter sessions, and 25 petty sessional divisions. 
Each of the four municipal boroughs has a separate commission 
of the peace and a separate court of quarter sessions. The total 
number of civil parishes is 700. Norfolk is mainly in the diocese 
of Norwich, with small parts in those of Ely and Lincoln; it 
contains 607 ecclesiastical parishes or districts, wholly or in 
part. For parliamentary purposes the county is divided into 
six divisions (North- Western, South-Western, Northern, 
Eastern, Mid, and Southern), and also includes the parliamentary 
boroughs of King's Lynn and Norwich, and part of the parlia- 
mentary borough of Great Yarmouth; each returning one 
member, except the city of Norwich, which returns two members. 

History. — The district which is now Norfolk was invaded in 
the second half of the 5th century by Angle tribes from north 
Germany, who, having secured the coast districts, worked their 
way inland along the river valleys. In the 7th century the land 
of the North-folk formed the northern half of East Anglia 
which at the time owned the supremacy of Kent, and later 
appears successively as a dependency of Mercia and Northumbria, 
until in 827 the whole land was united under the rule of Ecgbert. 
In 867 the Danes under Inguar and Ubba defeated and killed 
King Edmund at Thetford, but, although it formed an integral 
part of the Danelaw, Norfolk remained thickly settled by an 
almost exclusively Teutonic population. In the renewed 
Danish attacks of the nth century Norwich and Thetford were 
destroyed. At the time of the Norman invasion Norfolk formed 
part of Harold's earldom, but it offered no active resistance to 
the Conqueror, who built a castle at Norwich, and bestowed the 
earldom of East Anglia on Ralf Guader. The forfeited estates 
of Earl Ralf bad passed at the time of the Domesday Survey to 
Roger Bigod, ancestor of the earls of Norfolk, whose line expired 
in 1306. The Norfolk fief of Count Alan later formed part of 
the honour of Richmond; Robert Malet's fief became the 
honour of Eye; Hermer de Ferriere's fief became the barony 
of Wormegay, afterwards held by the Bardolfs; Hugh de Mont- 
fort's fee, as the honour of Haughley, was afterwards attached 
to the office of constable of Dover. The Howards were settled 
in the county from the 13th century, Thomas Howard being 
created duke of Norfolk for bis services at Flodden. Castle Acre 
was a seat of the earls of Warenne; Paston of the Pastons; 
Attleborough of the Mortimers; Caister of the Fastolfs. 

The shire-system was not definitely established in East 
Anglia before the Conquest, but the Domesday boundaries of 
Norfolk were practically those of the present day. The thirty-six 
Domesday hundreds were subdivided into leets, of which no 
trace remains, and the boroughs of Norwich and Thetford 
ranked as separate hundreds, while Yarmouth was the chief 
town of three hundreds. The Domesday hundred of Emneth 
is now included in Freebridge, and Docking in that of Smithdon, 
and the boundary between Brothercross and Gallow hundred 
has been considerably changed. Norfolk and Suffolk were 
united under one sheriff until the reign of Elizabeth, the shire 
court for the former being held at Norwich. The hundred court 
of Humbleyard hundred was held in the parish of Swardeston; 
that of Clackclose at Clack close hill on Stradsett common; 
Taverbam at Frettenham Hill; Grimeshoe at a tumulus between 
Brandon and Norwich; Forehoe in the parish of Carleton 
Forehoe; Greenhoe by the tumuli on the London road to 
Swaffham; Smithdon in the parish of Bircham Magna; Free- 
bridge at Flitcham Burgh, afterwards at an oak at Gaywood 
and still later at an oak at Wiggenhall St German's; Gallow in 
the 15th century at Fakenham; in. the 16th century at Longfield 
Stone; Brothercross, at the cross by the ford over the Burnham; 
Eynsford at Reepham; Depwade, at the Deep ford over the 
Tas; Mitford, in 1639, at " Brokpit "; North Erpingham, at 
Guneby Gate, near Gunton; South Erpingham, at Cawston 
Park Gate; Launditch, at the crossing of the Norwich road with 
the long ditch between Longham and Beeston; Earsham, at an 
encampment near the church. 

Norfolk formed part of the diocese of East Anglia from its 
foundation in 630, and in 1075 the bishop's see was placed at 
Thetford, whence it was transferred to Norwich in 1093. In 
1 1 21 the Norfolk portion of the diocese included the 12 deaneries 
of Norwich (or Taverham), Blofield, Ingworth, Sparham, Holt, 
Walsingham, Toftrees, Brisley, Breckles, Lynn, Thetford and 
Flegg — all in the archdeaconry of Norwich, and the 12 deaneries 
of Repps, Humbleyard, Depwade, Waxham, Brooke, Redenhall, 
Rockland, Cranwich, Fencham, Hitcham, Burnham and Hengham 
— in the archdeaconry of Norfolk. From this date the deaneries 
underwent little change, until the creation of the archdeaconry 
of Lynn in 1894, when they were entirely reconstituted. 
In the wars between John and his barons Roger Bigod garri- 
soned Norwich castle against the king, who in 1216 on his retreat 
from Lynn lost his baggage in the Wash. In the rising of 1381 
Norwich was plundered by the insurgents under Sir Roger 
Bacon of Baconsthorpe, and in the rising of 1549 against en- 
closures Norwich was again captured by the rebels under Ket. 
In the Civil War of the 1 7th century Norfolk as a whole adhered 
to the parliamentary cause, forming one of the six counties of 
the Eastern Association. Lynn, however, was held for the 
king by Sir Hamon Lestrange, and Norwich was one of the first 
cities to welcome back Charles II. 

At the time of the Domesday Survey sheep-fanning flourished 
almost throughout Norfolk, a flock of 1300 being mentioned at 
Walton, and horses were extensively bred; numerous bee- 
hives, nearly 600 water-mills and valuable river T fisheries are 
mentioned; and salt was made in the hundreds of Freebridge 
and East Flegg. The worsted trade was introduced by Flemish 
immigrants as early as the 12th century, and the woollen trade 
became especially prosperous in the hundreds adjoining the 
Wash. Linen was manufactured at Aylsham in the 14th century. 
Fuller, writing in the 17th century, describes Norfolk as abound- 
ing in all good things, and especially rabbits, herrings and 
worsteds. The leather industry flourished in Norman times. 

Norfolk returned members to parliament in 1290, and in 1298 
the county and the boroughs of Lynn, Norwich and Yarmouth 
returned each two members. Thetford acquired representation 
in 1529, and Castle Rising in 1558. Under the Reform Act of 
1832 the county returned four members in two divisions, and 
Castle Rising was disfranchised. Under the act of 1868 the 
county returned six members in three divisions, and Thetford 
and Yarmouth were disfranchised, the latter for notorious 
corruption. 

Antiquities. — There are few traces of Saxon architecture in 
the county, unless the towers of Dunham-Magna and Newton- 
by-Castleacre be assigned to this period. The round towers 
which are specially characteristic of the district are probably 
Norman. Although there are several fine specimens of Norman 
architecture in the county in addition to Norwich cathedral, 
and a few good examples of Early English, the majority of the 
churches are Decorated or Perpendicular, or a mixture of both 
styles. The most notable features of the churches are the flint 
and stone panels, the fine rood screens and the numerous 
brasses. The churches of the marshes in the N.W. are note- 
worthy, especially those of Tilney Ail Saints and Walsoken 
(Norman) and West Walton (Early English); the rich Norman 
church of Castle Rising should also be mentioned. At Northwold 
remains one of the rare Easter sepulchres. Apart from the 
churches in the towns, those of Worstead, Hingham, Cawston 
and Terrington St Clement may be quoted as typical examples 
of the numerous fine later Gothic village churches. Norfolk 
possessed an unusually large number of monastic foundations, 
but of these the remains are few and comparatively unimportant. 
The cathedral church of Norwich was originally connected with 
a very richly endowed Benedictine monastery. A foundation 
of almost equal importance was that of Augustinian canons at 
Walsingham, where there are remains of an Early English and 
Decorated church, a Decorated refectory and a Perpendicular 
gateway. The shrine of Our Lady of Walsingham was the 
resort of great numbers of pilgrims. Other monastic remains 
are Bromholm Priory near North Walsham; slight Early 
English fragments of Beeston Augustinian priory, W. of Cromer; 
good Norman and later remains at Binham (Benedictine) N.E. of 
Walsingham; the Benedictine nunnery of Carrow near Norwich; 
the fine church (Norman and later) of the Benedictine priory at 
Wymondham; and the remains at Castle Acre and Thetford. 

Of Norman keeps there are remains of the building at Castle 
Acre; there is a magnificent ruin at Castle Rising N.E. of Lynn; 
and Norwich Castle is kept in restoration. There are several 
old mansions of interest, such as the Jacobean brick building 
of Blickh'ng Hall, Bamingham Hall (161 2), Hunstanton, the 
moated Oxburgh Hall, and Cressingham Manor, both of the 15th 
century. The larger mansions, however, such as Sandringham 
(a seat of King Edward VII.), Holkham, Rainham, Costessey, 
Gunton, Houghton and Shadwell, are of more modern date. 
The Holkham estate was the scene of the agricultural work of 
Thomas William Coke, earl of Leicester (d. 1842), who success- 
fully proved that wheat could be profitably grown in this part 
of the county, and also made great improvements in live stock. 
Among sites of other various interests are Burnham Thorpe, the 
birthplace of Nelson; Paston and Oxnead, successive seats of 
the Paston family whose Letters are famous; and Ket's Oak 
near Hethersett, W. of Norwich, where Robert Ket took oath 
as leader of the agrarian rebellion of 1549. 

See Victoria County History; Norfolk; F. Blomefield, Essay 
towards a Topographical History of . . . Norfolk (London, 1739- 
1775 and 1805-1810); W. Rye, History of Norfolk (London, 1885); 
P. H. Emerson, Pictures of East Anglian Life (London, 1888), and 
other works; Rev. A. Jessopp, Arcady (London, 1887), and other 
works; Quarterly Review (London, 1897), where other literature is 
cited; G. C. Davies, Norfolk Broads and Rivers (Edinburgh, 1884). 


NORFOLK, a city of Madison county, Nebraska, U.S.A., on 
the north branch of the Elkhorn river, 2 m. from its mouth, 
and about 75 m. S.W. of Sioux City. Pop. (1900) 3883 (622 
foreign-born) ; (1910) 6025. It is served by the Union Pacific, the 
Chicago & North Western (of which it is a division headquarters), 
and the Chicago, St Paul, Minneapolis & Omaha railways. The 
city is the seat of the Northern Nebraska Insane Asylum. 
Cereals, alfalfa and fruit are raised in the surrounding country. 
The site was first permanently settled in 1866, Norfolk was 
incorporated as a village in 1881 and chartered as a city in 
1886; it became a city of the first class in 1909. 


NORFOLK, a city and port of entry of Norfolk county, Virginia, 
U.S.A., on the northern side of the Elizabeth river (an arm of 
the Chesapeake Bay) and at the mouth of its eastern branch, 
and on the Albemarle and Chesapeake and the Dismal Swamp 
canals, about 90 m. S.E. of Richmond. Pop. (1890) 34,871; 
(1900) 46,624, of whom 1705 were foreign-born and 20,230 were 
negroes; (1910 census) 67,452. It is served by the Atlantic 
Coast Line, the Seaboard Air line, the Southern, the New York, 
Philadelphia & Norfolk, the Chesapeake & Ohio, the Norfolk & 
Western, the Norfolk & Southern and the Virginian railways, 
by many steamship lines, by ferry to Portsmouth (immediately 
opposite), Newport News, Old Point Comfort and Hampton, 
and by electric lines to several neighbouring towns. The Norfolk 
and Portsmouth Belt Line encircles the two cities, and connects 
the various trunk lines. Among the prominent buildings and 
institutions are the Custom House, the Federal Building, Marine 
Hospital, St Christopher's Hospital, St Vincent's Hospital, 
Norfolk Protestant Hospital, Sara Leigh Hospital, Norfolk 
Public Library, Norfolk Academy, Cotton Exchange, City 
Market, Bank of Commerce Building, Citizens' Bank Building, 
Board of Trade Building, Law Building, Virginia Bank & Trust 
Company Building, Norfolk National Bank, Atlantic Hotel, 
Monticello Hotel, Lynnhaven Hotel, Norfolk Mission College 
(Presbyterian) for negroes and the historic St Paul's church, 
which was built in 1737 and was struck by a cannon-ball and 
partly burned in 1776; in the yard is one of the oldest cemeteries 
in the country. Norfolk is the see of a Protestant Episcopal 
bishopric. The city has a public park of no acres and various 
smaller ones, and in the vicinity are several summer resorts, 
notably Virginia Beach, Ocean View, Old Point Comfort, Pine 
Beach and Willoughby Beach. The " Norfolk " navy yard is 
in the southern part of the city of Portsmouth. The harbour 
is deep, easily accessible through a channel 30 ft. in depth, 
and well protected by forts Monroe and Wool. The city has 
immense coal piers. It is the largest peanut market in the 
world, is in a great truck-gardening region, and makes large 
shipments of cotton (822,930 bales in 1905), oysters, coal, 
fertilizers, lumber, grain, fruits, wine, vegetables, fish and 
live stock. Norfolk is combined with Portsmouth in one 
customs district, the foreign trade of which in 1908 amounted 
to $11,326,817 in exports and $1,150,044 in imports. One of 
the most important manufacturing industries is grading, roasting, 
cleaning and shelling peanuts (in 1905 valued at $791,760). 
In 1900 the value of the factory products was $4,691,779; in 
1905 it was $5,900,129, the city ranking third among the cities 
of the state in value of factory products. 

Norfolk was founded in 1682 in pursuance of an act of the 
Virginia Assembly passed in 1680 to establish towns for the 
encouragement of trade; it was incorporated as a borough in 
1736 by a royal charter, was chartered as a city in 1845, its 
charter being revised in 1882 and 1884, and received a new 
charter in 1906 (amended in 1908), under which there are a 
mayor (elected for four years), a common council, a board of 
aldermen and a board of control of three members, which has 
charge of public works, streets, sewers, drains and water supply, 
the police and fire departments, the work of the board of health, 
&c. Norfolk is administratively independent of Norfolk county. 
In 1906 the town of Berkley (incorporated in 1890; pop. in 
1900, 4988) was annexed. During the War of Independence 
Norfolk was bombarded on the 1st of January 1776 by the 
British under John Murray, 4th earl of Dunmore (1732- 
1809); much of the town was burned by the American troops 
to prevent Dunmore from establishing himself here. In 1855 
it suffered severely from yellow fever. At the outbreak of the 
Civil War the city was abandoned, and the navy yard was 
burned by the Federals in April 1861 ; Norfolk was then occupied 
until the 9th of May 1862 by Virginia troops, first under General 
William Booth Taliaferro (1822-1898) and later under General 
Benjamin Huger (1 806-1 877). Five miles from Norfolk and. 
with Norfolk as its headquarters was held from the 26th of 
April to the 30th of November 1907 the Jamestown Tercen- 
tennial Exposition, celebrating the first permanent English 
settlement in America at Jamestown, Virginia. 


NORFOLK ISLAND, an island in the Pacific Ocean, about 
800 m. E. of the nearest point of New South Wales, in 29 S., 
167 56' E. It stands on a submarine tableland extending 
about 18 m. to the N. and 25 m. to the S., and has itself an area 
of 8528 acres or 13-3 sq. m. The islets of Nepean and Phih'p 
lie near it. Its high cliff-bound coast is difficult of access. With 
a general elevation of 400 ft. above the sea the island rises in 
the N.W. to 1050 ft. in the double summit of Mount Pitt. The 
soil, of decomposed basalt, is wonderfully fertile. The rich 
undulating pasture-land with clumps of trees and copses resembles 
a park. Oranges, lemons, grapes, passion fruit, figs, pine-apples, 
guavas and other fruits grow abundantly; while potatoes, 
onions, maize and arrowroot can be cultivated. The Norfolk 
Island pine {Araucaria excelsa) is a magnificent tree, with a 
height sometimes exceeding 200 ft. and a girth of 30. A small 
species of palm is known as the Norfolk Island cabbage. Tree- 
ferns are abundant. The flora is most closely associated with 
that of New Zealand, and the avifauna indicates the same 
connexion rather than one with Australia, as those birds which 
belong to Australian genera are apparently immigrants, while 
those which occur on the island in common with New Zealand 
would be incapable of such distant •migration. The climate 
is healthy, the thermometer rarely sinking below 65 F. The 
island is a station of the British Pacific cable. It was discovered 
in 1774 by Captain Cook, and was taken by Philip King of the 
" Stirling " and twenty-four convicts from New South Wales. 
This settlement was abandoned in 1805, but in 1826 the island 
was made a penal settlement from New South Wales. In 1856, 
194 Pitcairn islanders took the place of the convicts. Forty 
of them soon returned to Pitcairn Island, and the remainder 
deteriorated owing to intermarriage. The administration of 
justice by an elected magistrate was unsatisfactory. Crime 
was rarely punished, and debts were not recoverable. A remedy 
was attempted in 1896 by an improvement in the government. 
The island was brought under the immediate administration 
of New South Wales; a chief magistrate, appointed by the 
governor of New South Wales, took the place of the elected 
magistrate, and an elected council of twelve elders superseded 
the general gathering of the adult population. In 1867 a Melan- 
esian mission station was established at St Barnabas, and in 
1882 a church was erected to the memory of Bishop Patteson, 
with windows designed by Bume-Jones and executed by William 
Morris. 


NORICUM (Noricus ager), in ancient geography, a district 
bounded on the N. by the Danube, on the W. by Raetia and 
Vindelicia, on the E. by Pannonia, on the S. by Pannonia and 
Italy, corresponding to the greater part of the modern Styria 
and Carinthia, and part of Austria, Bavaria and Salzburg. 
The original population appears to have consisted of Illyrians, 
who after trie great emigration of the Gauls became subordinate 
to various Celtic tribes, chief amongst them being the Taurisci, 
probably called Norici by the Romans from their capital Noreia 
(Neumarkt). The country is mountainous and the soil poor, 
but it was rich in iron, and supplied material for the manu- 
factories of arms in Pannonia, Moesia and northern Italy. 
The famous Noric steel was largely used for the Roman weapons 
(" Noricus ensis," Horace, Odes, i. 16. 9). The inhabitants 
were a brave and warlike people, who paid more attention to 
cattle-breeding than to. agriculture, although it is probable that 
the Romans, by draining the marshes and cutting down timber, 
increased the fertility of the soil. Gold and salt were also found 
in considerable quantities; the plant called saliunca (the wild 
or Celtic nard) grew in abundance, and was used as a perfume 
(Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxi. 20. 43) . Noricum was the southern outpost 
of the northern or Celtic peoples and the starting-point of their 
attacks upon Italy. It is in Noricum that we first hear of almost 
all these Celtic invaders. Archaeological researches, particularly 
in the cemeteries of Hallstatt (q.v.), less than 40 m. from Noreia, 
have shown that for centuries before recorded history there 
was a vigorous civilization. The Hallstatt cemeteries contained 
weapons and ornaments from the Bronze age, through the period 
of transition, up to the fully-developed Iron age. Professor- 
Ridge way (Early Age of Greece, i. ch. 5) has made out a strong 
case for the theory that in Noricum and the neighbouring 
districts was the cradle of the Homeric Achaeans. For a long 
time the Noricans enjoyed independence under princes of their 
own, and carried on commerce with the Romans. In 48 B.C. 
they took the side of Caesar in the civil war against Pompey. 
In 16, having joined with the Pannonians in invading Histria, 
they were defeated by Publius Silius, proconsul of Illyricum. 
From this time Noricum is called a province, although not 
organized as such, but remaining a kingdom with the title 
regnutn Noricum, It was under the control of an imperial 
procurator. It was not until the reign of Marcus Antoninus 
that the Legio II. Pi a (afterwards called Italica) was stationed 
at Noricum, and the commander of the legion became the 
governor of the province. Under Diocletian, Noricum was 
divided into Noricum ripense (along the Danube) and mediter- 
raneum (the southern mountainous district). Each division was 
under a praeses, and both belonged to the diocese of Illyria 
in the prefecture of Italy. The Roman colonies and chief towns 
were Virunum (near Mariasaal), Ovilava (Wels), Celeia (Cilli), 
Juvavum (Salzburg), Lauriacum (Lorch, at the mouth of the 
Enns, the ancient Anisus). 

See A. Muchar \ Das romische Norikum (Gratz, 1825) ;T. Mommsen, 
Corpus inscriptionum Latinarum, in. 587; J. Marquardt, Romische 
Staatsverwaltung, i. (2nd ed., 1881.) p. 290; Smith's Diet, of Gk. and 
Roman Geog. (1873); Mary B. Peaks, The General Civil and Military 
Administration of Noricum and Raetia (Chicago, 1907) ; full references 
to ancient authorities in A. Holder, Alt~celtischer Sprachschatz, ii. 
(1904). 0. H. F.) 


NORMAN, SIR HENRY WYLIE (1826-1904), field-marshal 
and colonial governor, was born on the 2nd of December 1826, 
and entered the Indian army at the age of seventeen. In 1840 
his father, who had been for many years a merchant in Cuba, 
became a partner in a mercantile house in Calcutta, where he 
was joined by his son in 1842. In 1844 the latter obtained a 
cadetship. He went through the second Sikh campaign and 
having attracted the favourable notice of Sir Colin Campbell 
( was selected by him to accompany an expedition against the 
Kohat Pass Afridis in 1850 as officiating brigade-major. The 
■ subaltern of twenty-four was given a substantive appointment 
in this capacity for a splendid deed of gallantry, which is recorded 
* by Sir Charles Napier in the following terms: " In the pass of 
' Kohat a sepoy picket, descending a precipitous mountain under 
fire and the rolling of large stones, had some men killed and 
wounded. Four of the latter, dreadfully hurt, crept under 
some rocks for shelter. They were not missed until the picket 
reached the bottom, but were then discovered by our glasses, 
high up and helpless. Fortunately the enemy did not see 
them, and some sepoys volunteered a rescue, headed by Norman 
of the 31st Native Infantry and Ensign Murray of the 70th 
Native Infantry. These brave men — would that the names of 
all were known to me for record! — ascended the rocks in defiance 
of the enemy, and brought the wounded men down." Norman 
served in numerous frontier expeditions between 1850 and 1854, 
and in the suppression of the Sonthal rebellion of 1855-56. 
In the Mutiny campaign he was constantly engaged, being 
present at the siege of Delhi, the relief of Lucknow and a number 
of other affairs. As adjutant-general of the Delhi Field Force, 
he was one of the leading spirits of the siege, and afterwards 
became its chief chronicler. Altogether he was mentioned 
twenty-five times in despatches. He afterwards became assistant 
military secretary for Indian affairs at the Horse Guards, 
military secretary to the government of India, military member 
of the viceroy's council and member of the secretary of state 
for India's council. In 1883 Sir Henry began his colonial 
career as governor, of Jamaica, an appointment from which 
he was transferred in 1888 to the governorship of Queensland. 
Here he remained until 1895, when he came home to act as 
agent-general for the colony in London. In 1893 he was offered 
the viceroyalty of India, but, after first accepting, declined it. 
In 1897 he was chairman of the royal commission of inquiry 
into the condition of the West Indies. In April ioor he was 
appointed governor of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, in succession 
to Sir Donald Stewart. In 1902 he was made a field-marshal. 
He died on the 26th of October 1904. 

See Sir William Lee Warner, Memoirs of Field-marshal Sir Henry 
Wylie Norman (1908). 


NORMAN, a city and township (coextensive) and the county- 
seat of Cleveland county, Oklahoma, U.S.A., about 2 m. N. of 
the Canadian river, and 18 m. S. by E. of Oklahoma City. 
Pop. (1890) 787; (1900) 2225; (1910) 3724. It is served by 
the Atchison, Topeka & Santa F6 railway. It is the seat of 
the university of Oklahoma (chartered, 1892; opened 1894; 
coeducational), which includes a college of arts and sciences, 
schools of applied science,medicine, pharmacy, mines and fine arts, 
and a preparatory school, and in 1908 had 56 instructors and 790 
students. The Oklahoma Insane Asylum is in the city. Cotton- 
seed oil, flour and ice are manufactured, and the neighbouring 
region produces much cotton, Indian corn, oats, alfalfa and wheat. 
Hogs, cattle and sheep are raised. The first settlement here was 
made in 1889, and Norman was chartered as a city in 1902. 


NORMANBY, CONSTANTINE HENRY PHIPPS, ist Marquess 
of (1797-1863), British statesman and author, son of Henry, 
ist earl of Mulgrave (1755-1831), was born on the 15th of May 
1797. The ist earl (who was created baron in 1794 and earl 
in 1812), was a distinguished soldier, and Pitt's chief military 
adviser; and he held the offices of chancellor of the duchy of 
Lancaster (1804), secretary for foreign affairs (1805), first lord 
of the admiralty (1 807-1810), and master of the ordnance 
(1810-1818). In 1792 he inherited the earlier Irish barony of 
Mulgrave — created in 1767 for his father, Constantine (1722- 
1775) grandson of Sir Constantine Phipps (1656-1723), the 
lord chancellor of Ireland — from his elder brother Constantine 
(1744-1792), a distinguished naval captain. His son, the future 
marquess, passed through Harrow and Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, and sat for the family borough of Scarborough as soon 
as he attained his majority. But, speaking in favour of Catholic 
emancipation, and dissenting in other points from the family 
politics, he resigned his seat, and went to h've in Italy for some 
two years. Returning in 1822, he was elected for Higham 
Ferrers, and made a considerable reputation by political 
pamphlets and by his speeches in the house. He was returned 
for Mai ton at the general election of 1826, becoming a supporter 
of Canning. He was already known as a writer of romantic 
tales, The English in Italy (1825); in the same year he made his 
appearance as a novelist with Matilda^ and in 1828 he produced 
another novel, Yes and No. Succeeding his father as earl of 
Mulgrave in 1831, he was sent out as governor of Jamaica, 
and was afterwards appointed lord-lieutenant of Ireland (1835- 
1839). He was created marquess of Normanby in 1838, and 
held successively the offices of colonial secretary and home 
secretary in the last years of Lord Melbourne's ministry. From 
1846 to 1852 he was ambassador at Paris, and from 1854 to 
1858 minister at Florence. The publication in 1857 of a journal 
kept in Paris during the stormy times of 1848 (A Year of Revolu- 
tion) , brought him into violent controversy with Louis Blanc, and 
he came into conflict with Lord Palmerston and Mr Gladstone, 
after his retirement from the public service, on questions of 
French and Italian policy. He died in London on the 28th 
of July 1863. He had married in 1818 the daughter of Lord 
Ravensworth, and was succeeded as 2nd marquess by his son 
George (1819-1890), a liberal politican, who became governor of 
Queensland (1 871-1874), New Zealand (1874-1879), and Victoria 
(1870-1884). 


NORMANDY, a province of old France, bounded on the N.E. 
by the river Bresle, which falls into the Channel at Treport and 
separates Normandy from Picardy, and then roughly by the 
Epte, which divides the Vexin into two parts. From the con- 
fluence of the Epte and Seine to Ivry, the boundary between 
Normandy and the Ile-de-France is artificial; it is afterwards 
practically determined by the course of the Eure and the Sarthe. 
But from there to the sea Normandy is separated by no natural 
boundary either from Maine or afterwards from Brittany; 
it lies fairly regularly in the direction from E. to W. The 
boundary between the coast of Normandy and that of Brittany 
is formed by the mouth of the Couesnon. Normandy is washed 
by the English Channel and lies opposite to England. The 
northern part of the coast consists of cliffs, which cease at the 
mouth of the Seine, the estuary of which is 12 km. wide from 
Havre to Trouville; the coast of Calvados consists of rocks and 
beaches; that of the peninsula of Cotentin is sandy on the 
eastern side and granite on the west; in the north it forms 
between the point of Barfleur and the cape of La Hague a kind 
of concave arc in which Ues the harbour of Cherbourg. 

Historical Geography. — In the time of Caesar the country which 
has since gone to form Normandy was inhabited by several tribes of 
the Gauls, the Caleti, who lived in the district of Caux, the Velio- 
cassi f in the Vexin, the Lexovii, in the Lieuvin, the Unelli in Cotentin ; 
these are the only ones whose names have been preserved for us by 
Caesar. At the beginning of the 5th century, when the Notitia 
provinciarum was drawn up, Normandy corresponded to the Pro- 
vincia Lugdunensis Secunda, the chief town of which was Rouen 
{Civiias Rotomagensium) ; it included seven civitates with that of 
Rouen: those of Bayeux (C. Bajocassium), Lisieux (C. Lexoviorum), 
Coutances (C. Constantia), Avranches (C. Abrincatum), Seez (C. 
Sagiorum) and Evreux (C. Ebroicorum). For ecclesiastical purposes 
it formed the ecclesiastical province of Rouen, with six suffragan 
sees. For civil purposes, the province was divided into a number 
of pagi: the civiias of Rouen formed the pagus Rotomagensis (Rou- 
mois), the p. Caletus (pays de Caux), the p. Vilcassinus (Vexin), the 
p. Tellaus (Talou); that of Bayeux the pagus Bajocassinus (Bessin), 
and the Otlinga Saxonia; that of Lisieux the pagus Lexovinus 
(Lieuvin) ; that of Coutances the p. Corilensis and p. Constantinus 
(Cotentin); that of Avranches the p. Abrincatinus (Avranchin); 
that of Sdez the p. Oximensis (Hie*mois), the p. Sagensis and p. 
Corbonensis (Corbonnais) ; and that of Evreux the p. Ebroicinus 
(Evrecin) and p. Madriacensis (pays de Madrie). It is to the settle- 
ment of the Normans in the country that Normandy owes its name; 
from the loth century onwards it formed a duchy, roughly coextensive 
with the ecclesiastical province of Rouen. Under the feudal regime, 
the energy of the Norman dukes prevented the formation of many 
powerful lordships, and there are few worthy of note, save the 
countships of Eu, Harcourt, Le Perche and Mortain. 

The duchy of Normandy, which was confiscated in 1204 by King 
Philip Augustus of France, formed in the 16th century the gouverne- 
went of Normandy; the extent of this gouvernement did not, as a 
matter of fact, correspond exactly to that of the duchy, for Le Perche, 
which had been part of the duchy, was annexed to the gouvernement 
of Maine, while the Thimerais, which had belonged to the countship 
of Blois, was joined, to the gouvernement of Normandy. In the 17th 
century this gouvernement was divided into three giniralitis or 
intendances: those of Rouen, Caen and Alencon. For judicial pur- 
poses Normandy was under the jurisdiction of the parlement of 
Kouen, created in 14.09. Since 1791 the territory of the old duchy 
has composed, roughly speaking, the departments of Seine-Infeneure, 
Eure, Calvados, Manche and Orne. 

History. — The prosperity of Normandy in Roman times is 
proved by the number and importance of the towns which 
existed there at that time. The most important was Lillebonne 
(Juliobona) t chief town of the Caletes, the Roman antiquities 
of which are famous. The evangelization of Normandy did 
not take place before the 3rd century: the first bishop of Rouen, 
about 260, seems to have been St Mallonus; it is possible, 
however, that before this date there were a few Christian com- 
munities in Normandy, as seems to be proved by the existence 
of St Nicasius, who was martyred in the Vexin. 

The province of Lugdunensis Secunda, which at the end of 
the 5th century formed part of the kingdom of Syagrius, was 
conquered by Clovis before 506, and during the Merovingian 
times followed the fortunes of Neustria. In the 9th century 
this country was ravaged by the Northmen, who were constantly 
going up and down the Seine, and later on it was formally 
ceded to them. During these incursions Rouen was occupied 
several times, notably in 876 and 885. 

The definitive establishment of the Normans, to whom the 
country owes its name, took place in 911, when by the treaty 
of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, concluded between King Charles the 
Simple of France and Rolf or Rollo, chief of the Normans, the 
territory comprising the town of Rouen and a few pagi situated 
on the sea-coast was ceded to the latter; but the terms of the 
treaty are ill-defined, and it is consequently almost impossible to 
find out the exact extent of this territory or to know whether 
Brittany was at this time made a feudal dependency of Normandy. 
But the chronicler Dudo of Saint-Quentin's statement that 
Rollo married Gisela, daughter of Charles the Simple, must be 
considered to be legendary. In 924 Rollo received from the 
king of France Bessin and Maine. Although baptized, he seems 
to have preserved certain pagan customs. The history of 
Normandy under Rollo and his immediate successors is very 
obscure, for the legendary work of Dudo of Saint-Quentin is 
practically our only authority. 

Rollo died in 927, and was succeeded by his son William 
" Long Sword," born of his union more danico with Poppa, 
daughter of count B6renger; he showed some attachment to 
the Scandinavian language, for he sent his son William to 
Bayeux to learn Norse. The first two dukes also displayed 
a certain fidelity to the Carolingian dynasty of France, and 
in 936 William " Long-Sword " did homage to Louis IV. 
d'Outremer. He died on the 17th of December 942, assassinated 
by the count of Flanders. 

During the minority of his successor, Duke Richard, King 
Louis IV., who was making an expedition into Normandy, was 
captured by the inhabitants of Rouen and handed over to Hugh 
the Great. From this time onwards the dukes of Normandy 
began to enter into relations with the dukes of France; and in 
958 Duke Richard married Hugh the Great's daughter. He 
died in 996. At the beginning of the reign of his son, Richard II. 
(996-1026), there was a rising of the peasants, who formed 
assemblies with a view to establishing fresh laws for the manage- 
ment of the forests. This attempt at insurrection, described 
by William of Jumieges, and treated by many historians, on 
the authority of the poet Wace, as a sort of democratic move- 
ment, was put down with a firm hand. Richard III. reigned 
from 1026-1027; he seems to have been poisoned by his brother, 
Robert the Magnificent, or the Devil (1027-1035), who succeeded 
him. In 1 03 1 Robert supported King Henry I. of France against 
his brother Robert, who was laying claim to the throne, and in 
return for his services received the French Vexin. The duke 
died on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, leaving as his heir an illegiti- 
mate son, William, born of his union with the daughter of a 
tanner of Falaise. 

William was very young when his father started for the Holy 
Land, leaving him under the protection of the king of France. 
In 1047 Henry I. had to defend the young duke against an army 
of rebellious nobles, whom he succeeded in beating at Val-es- 
dunes. In the following year the king of France was in his turn 
supported by the duke of Normandy in his struggle against 
Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou; the two allies besieged 
Mouliherne (1048); and the war was continued between the 
duke of Normandy and the count of Anjou by the siege of 
Alencon, which was taken by Geoffrey Martel, then retaken by 
William, and that of Domfront, which in 1049 had to surrender 
to Duke William. 

In 1054 William the Bastard married Matilda, daughter of 
Baldwin V., count of Flanders, in spite of the opposition of 
Pope Leo IX., who only gave his consent on condition that 
William and Matilda should each build an abbey: under these 
conditions were built the Abbaye-aux-Hommes and the Abbaye- 
aux-Dames at Caen. The king of France had at first protected 
William, but before long became alarmed at his ambitions; 
the first sign of his feeling of rivalry with the duke was the 
encouragement he gave to the revolt of William Busas, count 
of Eu and Montreuil, who claimed the ducal crown. In 1054 
he invaded Normandy with his brother Odo and this count, 
but Odo was beaten at Mortemer. In 1058 the king of France, 
joined by Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou, tried to revenge 
himself, but was beaten at the ford of Varaville (1058). 

Towards the same time took place the annexation of Maine 
to Normandy, for a short period only. Herbert II., the young 
count of Maine, who was a vassal of the count of Anjou, did 
homage to William the Bastard between 1055 and 1060, perhaps 
after the defeat of Geoffrey Martel; he promised to marry one 
of William's daughters, and betrothed his sister Margaret to the 
duke's son, Robert Curthose, on the understanding that, if he 
died leaving no children, the countship was to fall to William. 
After his death, the people of Maine revolted (1063), choosing 
as their lord Walter of Mantes, count of Vexin; but William 
the Bastard, after one campaign, succeeded in imposing the 
authority of Normandy. Three years later, William took posses- 
sion of England, of which he was crowned king in 1066. 
Normandy now became the scene of William's quarrels with 
his son, Robert Curthose, who laid claim to Normandy and 
Maine, and with the aid of King Philip I. of France succeeded in 
defeating his father at Gerberoi in 1079. 

William the Conqueror died on the 7th of September 1087, 
and was buried in the church of St Etienne at Caen. After 
his death his eldest son, Robert Curthose, kept Normandy and 
Maine, and his second son, William Rufus, became king of England. 
In 1091 William Rufus made a vain attempt to recover Nor- 
mandy; but in 1096 Robert departed on a crusade and pledged 
the duchy to his brother for 10,000 livres. When Robert 
returned*, William Rufus had just died, and his youngest brother, 
Ffenry Beauclerc, had already taken possession of the crown. 
Henry was ambitious of uniting Normandy to England; in 
1 105, with the aid of Helias, count of Maine, and the son of 
Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou, he took and burnt Bayeux, 
but failed to take Falaise. On the 28th of September 1106, by 
the help of William, count of Evreux, Robert, count of Meulan, 
Robert de Varenne, and Helias, count of Maine, he defeated 
his brother at Tinchebrai, took him prisoner, and seized Nor- 
mandy. Duke Robert passed the rest of his life in captivity 
and died in 1134. 

From 1 106 to 1204 Normandy remained united to England. 
According to Ordericus Vi talis, whose Historia ecclesiastica is 
a chronicle of the greatest interest for the history of Normandy 
in the nth and 12th centuries, Henry Beauclerc governed 
the two kingdoms wisely, checking the nobles, and protecting 
the Church and the common people. He carried on hostilities 
against the king of France and William Clito, son of Robert 
Curthose, whose claim to the duchy of Normandy was upheld 
by Louis VI., and won an important victory over his opponents 
at Bremule in Normandy (n 19). After the disaster of the 
White Ship (1121), in which the Atheling William lost his life, 
Henry's only surviving child was a daughter, Matilda, widow 
of the emperor Henry V. In n 27 Matilda married Geoffrey the 
Fair, eldest son of Fulk V., count of Anjou. After the death 
of Henry I. in 113 5, a struggle arose between Matilda, who 
claimed the kingdom of England and the duchy of Normandy in 
the name of her son Henry Plantagenet, and Theobald, count 
of Champagne, grandson of William the Conqueror on the side 
of his mother Adela, the candidate of the Normans of Normandy, 
while the Norman party in England supported Stephen, brother 
of Theobald. In 1144 Theobald, whose position had been 
much weakened since the taking of the castle of Rouen, gave up 
his rights in Normandy to Matilda's husband Geoffrey, count 
of Anjou, in favour of Henry Plantagenet. Between 1139 and 
1 145 Geoffrey, with French and Flemish help, gradually subdued 
Normandy, and on his death, in 1151, his son Henry Plantagenet 
was master of Normandy as well as count of Anjou. In 1152,. 
by his marriage with Eleanor, duchess of Aquitaine, the divorced 
wife of Louis VIL of France, Aquitaine also was secured to 
himself and his descendants. Finally, in 1 153, he was recognized 
by Stephen of Blois as heir to the throne of England. The 
duchy of Normandy, though nominally in feudal dependence on 
the king of France, thus became part of the great Angevin 
empire, of which the power and resources were more than equal 
to that of the French kings. The perennial struggle, dating 
from this period, between the kings of England and France is 
dealt with elsewhere (see France: History, and English: 
History). 

From the first the French kings were fully conscious of the 
menace of the Angevin power. The reign of Louis VII. was 
occupied by the struggle against Henry II. In 11 58 he com- 
mitted the blunder of concluding a treaty with Henry, by which 
he was to give his daughter Margaret in marriage to Henry 
Short Mantle, eldest son of Henry II., with the French Vexin 
as her dowry. The Vexin was consequently the scene of 
hostilities in 11 59 and 1165. In 11 73 Louis VIL, resuming the 
policy of his grandfather and father, took advantage of the 
strife which broke out in the family of the king of England,, 
and took the part of Henry II. 's sons who were in revolt against 
their father. He negotiated with Henry Short Mantle, duke of 
Normandy, as though he were king of England, but owing to- 
his weakness did not gain any serious advantage. In 11 73 he 
abandoned the siege of Verneuil, in 11 74 that of Rouen, and was 
no more successful in 11 76. 

Philip Augustus (1 180-1223) pursued the same policy with 
greater tenacity and success. He began by taking part against 
Henry II. with his son and successor, Richard Cceur de Lion,, 
who obtained the throne on the death of Henry II. in 1189. 
From the point of view of Normandy, the most important events 
of Richard's reign .were: the truce of Issoudun, by which 
Philip Augustus kept the Norman Vexin which he had just 
conquered (1195), the building by Richard of Chateau-Gaillard 
(1196), and finally the defeat of Philip Augustus by Richard at 
Courcelles, near Gisors (1198). On the death of Richard at 
Chains in 11 99 the position of Philip Augustus was critical. 
This situation was modified under the reign of John Lackland, 
Richard's brother, who had himself crowned duke of Normandy 
at Rouen (April 25, 1199). Philip Augustus set up in opposition 
to him Arthur of Brittany, son of Geoffrey and grandson of 
Henry II., and the first phase of the struggle between the kings 
of France and England continued until the treaty of Goulet 
(1200). But in 1202 Philip made a fresh attempt to seize the 
continental possessions of the kings of England. An excuse for 
reopening hostilities offered itself in the abduction, by John, 
of Isabel of Angoul£me, the betrothed of Hugh le Brun, son of 
the count of La Marche. The barons appealed to Philip Augustus, 
who summoned John to appear before the royal judges; he 
failed to appear, and was consequently condemned by default, 
as a disloyal vassal, to have all the fiefs which he held in France 
confiscated (April 1202). The confiscation, a purely legal and 
formal operation, was followed by the actual conquest. 

In June 1 202 Philip Augustus invaded Normandy and 
besieged the castle of Arques, near Dieppe; at the same time- 
Arthur of Brittany was taken prisoner by John at Mirebeau in 
Poitou, and imprisoned in the castle of Falaise, from which 
he was removed to Rouen and died, probably assassinated by 
John's orders. The conquest of Normandy began with the 
occupation of Chateau-Gaillard after an eight months' siege 
(September 1203- April 1204); the rest of Normandy was taken 
during the following months, Rouen surrendering in 1204 but 
obtaining a guarantee of her privileges. The conquest of 
Normandy by the French was not, however, recognized officially 
till the treaty of Paris (1259). 

Normandy enjoyed a time of comparative prosperity under 
French rule, up to the time of the Hundred Years' War. The 
institution of the Estates of Normandy even assured her a sort 
of independence. In 1329 the duchy of Normandy was revived 
in favour of John, son of King Philip VI. 

Owing to her geographical position, Normandy suffered 
heavily during the Hundred Years' War. In 1346 Edward III., 
at the instance of Godefroi d'Harcourt lord of Saint-Sauveur, 
invaded Normandy, landing at Saint-Vast-la-Hougue (July 12); 
and arriving at Caen on the 25th of July, he laid waste the 
country as far as Poissy. After the accession of John II. (1350), 
Normandy was again separated from the crown and given as 
an appanage to the dauphin Charles. The treaty of London 
(1359) stipulated for its cession to England, but the provisions 
of the treaty were modified by those of the treaty of Bre*tigny 
(1360), and it remained in the possession of France. 

John II. died in 1364, and was succeeded by his son Charles V. 
One of the chief feudatories of Normandy, Charles the Bad, 
grandson of Louis X. le Hutin, and a claimant to the crown of 
France, was in 1365, owing to his continued treachery, deprived 
of the countship of Longueville, and in 1378 of all his other 
possessions in Upper and Lower Normandy. The most striking 
event of the war between the French and English which took 
place in Normandy during the reign of Charles V. was the siege 
of Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte, which was occupied by the English, 
and only surrendered after a siege of several years. 

The opening years of the reign of Charles VI. (1380-1422) 
were disturbed by a revolt which broke out at Rouen against 
the aides which the royal government had tried to impose 
(1381); a cloth-merchant was proclaimed king of Rouen, and 
Charles was obliged to go in person to Rouen to put down the 
insurrection. In 141 5 the war with England was resumed: 
an English army of 60,000 men landed on the 14th of August at 
the mouth of the Seine, took Harfieur on the 16th of September, 
and finally defeated the army of the king of France at Agincourt. 
During the following years the whole of Normandy was occupied, 
Rouen holding out for nearly six months (July 29, 1418-January 
13, 1419), and Henry V. of England entrusted the administration 
of Normandy to a special council. In spite of the moderation 
of the duke of Bedford's government, Normandy, ruined by the 
war, was in a state of great distress, and in the years following 
the treaty of Troyes (1420) there was a continual resistance 
offered to the English. This resistance became general after the 
expeditions of Joan of Arc and the treaty of Arras; at the end of 
1435 the whole district of Caux, and in 1436 that of the Val de 
Vire revolted; Mont-Saint-Michel, which had never been 
taken by the English, continued to resist, and in order to keep 
guard over it the English built Granville. But Normandy was 
not recovered by the French till after the sack of Fougeres (1440)- 
Cotentin was reconquered by Richmond (see Arthur, duke of 
Brittany) and the duke of Brittany; Rouen surrendered on the 
29th of October 1449. In face of these successes of the French, 
an English army was sent into Normandy under the leadership 
of Thomas KyrieL; it landed at Cherbourg and marched across 
Cotentin to Bayeux, but was met at Formigny (April 15, 145°) 
by the count of Clermont and utterly routed. Shortly after- 
wards Caen, and finally Cherbourg, capitulated. 

After the French conquest, the history of Normandy is less 
eventful. In 1465 Normandy was given as an appanage to 
Charles, brother of King Louis XL, who was deprived of it in 
1467. The kings of France tried to win the support of Nor- 
mandy by certain favours, such as maintaining the provincial 
Estates and the University of Caen, founded by the kings of 
England, and transforming the Exchequer of Normandy into 
a permanent court of justice (1499) which was called the Parle- 
ment of Normandy and sat at Rouen in the famous Palais de 
Justice. Among the measures which contributed to the increase 
of the prosperity of Normandy should be noted the construction 
in 1752 of the Havre de Grace. 

During the 16th century the Protestant Reformation met 
with some success in Normandy, where the Wars of Religion 
caused a certain amount of disturbance. The Reforming 
movement began with Pierre Bar in 1528, and the first apostle 
of the Reformation at Rouen was Francois Legay, called Bois- 
normand.. In 1562 the town of Rouen was taken by the 
Calvinists, but retaken in the same year by the Catholics. 
Caen received the Reformed religion in 1531, and Alencon in 
1582. In the massacre of Saint Bartholomew's day (1572) 
more than 500 victims were slaughtered by the Catholics. 

In spite of the success of Protestant ideas, however, the 
Catholic party of the League succeeded after 1588 in establishing 
itself in Normandy, and King Henry IV. had to conquer it by 
force of arms. The most famous engagements during this 
expedition were the victories of Henry IV. at Arques and Ivry, 
but he failed to take Rouen, which was defended by Alexander 
Farnese, duke of Parma, and only surrendered after the abjura- 
tion of the king. 

The history of Normandy in the 17th and 18th centuries 
contains few events of note, except for a few attempts at landing 
made by the English during the Seven Years' War (1756-1763); 
in 1758 the English admiral Anson attacked Cherbourg, and in 
1759 Admiral Rodney bombarded Havre. From 1700 dates 
the creation of the departments, when Normandy ceased to 
have a separate political existence, and her history becomes 
one with that of France. 

See G. Depping, Histoire de la Normandie (2 vols., 1835); Fr. 
Palgrave, The History of Normandy and of England (2 vols., 1851- 
1857); E. A. Freeman, The History of the Norman Conquest of 
England (3rd ed., 5 vols., Oxford, 1877); Joh. Steenstrup, Les 
Normands (1880); Louis du Bois, ItMraire descriptif, historique 
et monumental des cinq dSpartements composant la Normandie (1828) ; 
John Cotman, Architectural Antiquities of Normandy (2 vols., 1820); 
Leopold Delisle, £tude sur la condition des classes agricohs en Nor- 
mandie (reprinted 1906), La Normandie illustrie (2 vols., 1852-1855); 
A. Duchesne, Historiae Normanorum scriptores antiqui (1619); E. J. 
Tardif, Les Coutumiers de Normandie (1881-1896); fidouard Frere, 
Manuel de bibliographie normande (1 858-1860); Artur du Monstier, 
Neustria pia (1663); N. Oursel, Nouvelle Biographie normande 
(3 vols., 1886-1888). Publications of the learned societies of the 
province analysed in the Bibliographie of Robert de Lasteyrie. 

(R. La.) 


NORMANS, the softened form of the word "Northman," 
applied first to tbe people of Scandinavia in general, and after- 
wards specially to the people of Norway. In the form of " Nor- 
man " (Northmannus, Normannus, Normand) it is the name 
of those colonists from Scandinavia who settled themselves in 
Gaul, who founded Normandy, who adopted the French tongue 
and French manners, and who from their new home set forth on 
new errands of conquest, chiefly in the British Islands and in 
southern Italy and Sicily. From one point of view the expedi- 
tions of the Normans may be looked on as continuations of the 
expeditions of the Northmen. As the name is etymologically the 
same, so the people are by descent the same, and they are still 
led by the old spirit of war and adventure. But in the view of 
general history Normans and Northmen must be carefully 
distinguished. The change in the name is the sign of a thorough 
change, if not in the people themselves, yet in their historical 
position. Their national character remains largely the same; 
but they have adopted a new religion, a new language, a new 
system of law and society, new thoughts and feelings on all 
matters. Like as the Norman still is to the Northman, the 
effects of a settlement of Normans are utterly different from the 
effects of a settlement of Northmen. There can be no doubt 
that the establishment of the Norman power in England was, 
like the establishment of the Danish power, greatly helped by 
the essential kindred of Normans, Danes and English. But 
it was helped only silently. To all outward appearance the 
Norman conquest of England was an event of an altogether 
different character from the Danish conquest. The one was a 
conquest by a people whose tongue and institutions were still 
palpably akin to those of the English. The other was a conquest 
by a people whose tongue and institutions were palpably different 
from those of the English. The Norman settlers in England felt 
no community with the earlier Danish settlers in England. In 
fact the Normans met with the steadiest resistance'in a part of 
England which was largely Danish. But the effect of real, 
though unacknowledged, kindred had none the less an important 
practical effect. There can be no doubt that this hidden working 
of kindred between conquerors and conquered in England, as 
compared with the utter lack of all fellowship between conquerors 
and conquered in Sicily, was one cause out of several which made 
so wide a difference between the Norman conquest of England 
and the Norman conquest of Sicily. 

These two conquests, wrought in the great island of the Ocean 
and in the great island of the Mediterranean, were the main 
works of the Normans after they had fully put on the 
Character character of a Christian and French-speaking people, 
Normans, in other words, after they had changed from Northmen 
into Normans. The English and the Sicilian settle- 
ments form the main Norman history of the nth century. The 
ioth century is the time of the settlement of the Northmen in 
Gaul, and of the change in religion and language of which the 
softening of the name is the outward sign. By the end of it, any 
traces of heathen faith, and even of Scandinavian speech, must 
have been mere survivals. The new creed, the new speech, the 
new social system, had taken such deep root that the descendants 
of the Scandinavian settlers were better fitted to be the armed 
missionaries of all these things than the neighbours from whom 
they bad borrowed their new possessions. With the zeal of new 
converts they set forth on their new errand very much in the 
spirit of their heathen forefathers. If Britain and Sicily were the 
greatest fields of their enterprise, they were very far from being 
the only fields. The same spirit of enterprise which brought the 
Northmen into Gaul seems to carry the Normans out of Gaul 
into every corner of the world. Their character is well painted 
by a contemporary historian of their exploits. 1 He sets the 
Normans before us as a race specially marked by cunning, despis- 
ing their own inheritance in the hope of winning a greater, eager 
after both gain and dominion, given to imitation of all kinds, 
holding a certain mean between lavishness and greediness — that 
is, perhaps uniting, as they certainly did, these two seemingly 
opposite qualities. Their chief men, he adds, were specially 
lavish through their desire of good report. They were, moreover, 
a race skilful in flattery, given to the study of eloquence, so that 
the very boys were orators, a race altogether unbridled unless 
held firmly down by the yoke of justice. They were enduring 
of toil, hunger, and cold whenever fortune laid it on them, given 
to hunting and hawking, delighting in the pleasure of horses, 
and of all the weapons and garb of war. Several of these features 
stand out very clearly in Norman history. The cunning of the 
Normans is plain enough; so is their impatience of restraint, 
unless held down by a strong master. Love of imitation is also 
marked. Little of original invention can be traced to any strictly 
Norman source; but no people were ever more eager to adopt 
from other nations, to take into their service and friendship from 
any quarter men of learning and skill arid eminence of every 
kind. To this quality is perhaps to be attributed the fact that 
a people who did so much, who settled and conquered in so large 
a part of Europe, has practically vanished from the face of the 
earth. If Normans, as Normans, now exist anywhere, it is 
certainly only in that insular fragment of the ancient duchy 
which still cleaves to the successor of its ancient dukes. Else- 
where, as the settlers in Gaul became French, the emigrants from 
Gaul became English, Irish, Scottish, and whatever we are to 
call the present inhabitants of Sicily and southern Italy. Every- 

^Geoffrey Malaterra, i. 3 " Est quippe gens astutissima, in- 
juriarum ultrix, spe alias plus lucrandi, patnos agros vilipendens, 
quaestus et dominationis avida, cujuslibet rei simulatnx, inter 
largitatem et avaritiam quoddam medium habens. Principes vero 
delectatione bonae famae largissimi, gens adulari sciens, eloquentiis 
in studiis inserviens in tantum, ut etiam ipsos pueros quasi rhetores 
attendas, quae quidem, nisi jugo justitiae prematur, effrenatissima 
est; laboris, mediae, algoris, ubi fortuna expedit, patiens, venationi 
accipitrum exercitio inserviens. Equorum, caeterorumque militiae 
instrumentorum, et vestium luxuria delectatur. Ex nomine itaaue 
suoterrae nomen indiderunt. North quippe Anglica lingua amiilo- 
naris plaga dicitur. Et quia ipsi ab aquilone venerant terram ipsam 
etiam Normanniam appellarunt." 

where they gradually lost themselves among the people whom 
they conquered; they adopted the language and the national 
feelings of the lands in which they settled ; but at the same time 
they often modified, often strengthened the national usages 
and national life of the various nations in which they were finally 
merged. 

But Geoffrey hardly did justice to the Normans if he meant to 
imply that they were simple imitators of others. Their position 
was very like that of the Saracens. Hasty writers who 7- Ar / r 
forget the existence of the eastern Rome are apt to faculty of 
claim for the Saracens of Bagdad, or more commonly adapta- 
for those of Cordova, a monopoly of science and art ilon * 
at some time not very clearly defined by dates. In so doing 
they slur over the real position and the real merit of the Saracens 
with regard to science and art. In neither department did any 
Saracen, strictly speaking, invent anything; but they learned 
much both from Constantinople and from Persia, and what they 
learned they largely developed and improved. The Normans 
did just the same. They adopted the French tongue, and were 
presently among the first to practise and spread abroad its 
literature. They adopted the growing feudal doctrines of France, 
and worked them, both in Normandy and in England, into a 
harmonious system. From northern Italy, as it would seem, they 
adopted a style of architecture which grew in their hands, both 
in Normandy and in England, into a marked and living form of 
art. Settled in Gaul, the Scandinavian from a seafaring man 
became a landsman. Even in land-warfare he cast aside the 
weapons of his forefathers; but he soon learned to handle the 
weapons of his new land with greater prowess than they had 
ever been handled before. He welcomed the lore of every 
stranger. Lanfranc brought law and discipline; Anselm brought 
theology and philosophy. The gifts of each were adopted and 
bore fruit on both sides of the Channel. And no people ever 
better knew how to be all things to all men. The Norman power 
in England was founded on full and speedy union with the one 
nation among whom they found themselves. The Norman power 
in Sicily was founded on a strong distinction between the ruling 
people and the many nations which they kept in peace and 
prosperity hy not throwing in their lot with any one among them. 

The quality which Geoffrey Malaterra expresses by the word 
" effrenatissima " is also clearly marked in Norman history. 
It is, in fact, the groundwork of the historic Norman character. 
It takes in one case the form of ceaseless enterprise, in another 
the form of that lawlessness which ever broke out, both in 
Normandy and in every other country settled by Normans, 
when the hand of a strong ruler was wanting. But it was balanced 
by another quality which Geoffrey does not speak of, one which 
is not really inconsistent with the other, one which is very promi- 
nent in the Norman character, and which is, no less than the 
other, a direct heritage from their Scandinavian forefathers. 
This is the excessive litigiousness, the fondness for law, legal 
forms, legal processes, which has ever been characteristic of 
the people. If the Norman was a born soldier, he was also a 
born lawyer. Ranulf Flambard, working together the detached 
feudal usages of earlier times into a compact and logical system 
of feudal law, was as characteristic a type of the people as any 
warrior in the Conqueror's following. He was the organizer 
of an endless official army, of an elaborate technical system 
of administration, which had nothing like it in England before, 
but which grew up to perfection under Norman rulers. 2 But 
nothing so well illustrates this formal side of the Norman char- 
acter as the whole position of William the Conqueror himself. 
His claim to the crown of England is something without earlier 
precedent, something as far as possible removed from the open 
violence of aggressors who have no pretexts with which to dis- 
guise their aggression. It rested on a mass of legal assumptions 
and subtleties, fallacious indeed, but ingenious, and, as the 
result proved, effective. His whole system of government, his 

	* This view of Ranulf Flambard's work, which on Freeman's 
	authority superseded the older view, which attributed the feudal 
	organization of England to the Conqueror himself, was subjected to a 

	1 destructive criticism by Mr J. H. Round in his Feudal England. (Ed.) 

confiscations, his grants, all that he did, was a logical deduction 
from one or two legal principles, arbitrary certainly in their 
conception, but strictly carried out to their results. Even 
Norman lawlessness in some sort took a legal shape. In the 
worst days of anarchy, in the minority of William or under the 
no-reign of Robert, the robber-baron could commonly give 
elaborate reasons for every act of wrong that he did. 

It is perhaps less wonderful that this characteristic should 
have been left out in a picture of the Normans in Apulia and 
Sicily than if it had been left out in a picture of the Normans 
in Normandy and England. The circumstances of their ApuJian 
and Sicilian conquests certainly did not tend to bring out this 
feature of their character so strongly as it was brought out by 
the circumstances of their English conquest. Possibly the same 
cause may have kept the chronicler from enlarging on their 
religious character; yet in Sicily at least they might pass for 
crusaders. Crusaders in fact they were before crusades were 
preached. Norman warriors had long before helped the Christians 
of Spain in their warfare with the Saracens of the Peninsula, 
and in Sicily it was from the same enemy that they won the 
I great Mediterranean island. Others had done a kindred worjc 
in a more distant field as helpers of the Eastern emperors against 
the Turks of Asia. All these might pass for religious wars, and 
they might really be so; it needed greater ingenuity to set 
forth the invasion of England as a missionary enterprise designed 
for the spiritual good of the benighted islanders. The Norman, 
a strict observer of forms in all matters, attended to 
ance'of the forms of religion with special care. No people 
Forms"* were more bountiful to ecclesiastical bodies on both 
sides of the Channel;" the foundation of a Benedictine 
monastery in the nth century, of a Cistercian monastery in 
the 1 2th seemed almost a matter of course on the part of a 
Norman baron. The Conqueror beyond doubt sincerely aimed 
at being a religious reformer both in his duchy and in his kingdom, 
while it is needless to say that his immediate successor was 
exceptionally ungodly, whether among Normans or among other 
men. But among their countrymen generally strict attendance 
to religious observances, a wide bounty to religious foundations, 
may be set down as national characteristics. On the other hand, 
none were less inclined to submit to encroachments on the part 
of the ecclesiastical power, the Conqueror himself least of all. 

We thus see in the Scandinavian settlers in Gaul, after they 
had put on the outward garb of their adopted country, a people 
restless and enterprising above all others, adopting 
The Con- and spreading abroad all that they could make their 
Vagtind own in their new land and everywhere else — a people 
atsklty * n manv wavs highly gifted, greatly affecting and 
compared, modifying at the time every land in which they settled, 
but, wherever they settled, gradually losing themselves 
among the people of the land. The Norman, as a visible 
element in the country, has vanished from England, and 
he has vanished from Sicily. The circumstances of his settle- 
ment in his two great fields of conquest were widely different; 
his position when he was fully established in his two insular 
realms was widely different; but the end has been the same 
in both cases. Neither island has for ages been in any sense a 
Norman land, and the tongue which the Norman brought with 
him into both has not for ages been spoken in either. Norman 
influence has been far stronger in England than in Sicily, and 
signs of Norman presence are far more easily recognized. But 
»the Norman, as a distinct people, is as little to be seen in the 
one island as in the other. His disappearance in both cases 
is an illustration of one of the features which we have spoken 
of in the Norman character, the tendency which in fact made 
Normans out of Northmen, the tendency to adopt the language 
• and manners of the people among whom they found themselves. 
But, as far as outward circumstances are concerned, we may 
say that the same effect has been brought about by different 
and almost opposite causes. The whole circumstances of the 
conquest of England constrained the conquerors to become 
Englishmen in order to establish themselves in the conquered 
land. In William's theory, the forcible conquest of England 
by strangers was an untoward accident. The lawful heir of 
the English crown was driven against his will to win his rights 
by force from outside. But he none the less held his crown 
as an English king succeeding according to English law. More- 
over, every Norman to whom he granted lands and offices held 
them by English law in a much truer sense than the king held 
his; he was deemed to step into the exact position of his 
English predecessor, whatever that might be. This legal theory 
worked together with other causes to wipe out all practical 
distinction between the conquerors and the conquered in a 
wonderfully short time. By the end of the 12th century the 
Normans in England might fairly pass as Englishmen, and they 
had largely adopted the use of the English language. The 
fashionable use of French for nearly two centuries longer was 
far more a French fashion than a Norman tradition. When 
the tradition of speaking French had all but died out, the practice 
was revived by fashion. Still the tradition had its effect. The 
fashion could hardly have taken root except in a land where the 
tradition had gone before it. 

The Normans in England therefore became Englishmen, 
because there was an English nation into which they could be 
absorbed. The Normans in Sicily could hardly be said to become 
Sicilians, for there assuredly was no Sicilian nation for them 
to be absorbed into. While the Normans in England were lost 
among the people of the land, the Normans in Sicily were lost 
among their fellow-settlers in the land. The Normans who 
came into Sicily must have been much less purely Norman 
than the Normans who came into England. The army of Duke 
William was undoubtedly very far from being wholly made up 
of Normans, but it was a Norman army; the element which 
was not Norman, though considerable, was exceptional. But 
we may doubt whether the Norman invaders of Sicily were 
Norman in much more than being commanded by Norman 
leaders. They were almost as little entitled to be called pure 
Scandinavians as the Saracens whom they found in the island 
were entitled to be called pure Arabs. The conquest of England 
was made directly from Normandy, by the reigning duke, in 
a comparatively short time, while the conquest of Sicily grew out 
of the earlier and far more gradual conquest of Apulia and 
Calabria by private men. The Norman settlements at Aversa and 
Capua were the work of adventurers, making their own fortunes 
and gathering round them followers from all quarters. They 
fought simply for their own hands, and took what they could 
by the right of the stronger. They started with no such claim 
as Duke William' put forth to justify his invasion of England; 
their only show of legal right was the papal grant of conquests 
that were already made. The conquest of Apulia, won bit by 
bit in many years of what we can only call freebooting, was 
not a national Norman enterprise like the conquest of England, 
and the settlement to which it led could not be a national 
Norman settlement in the same sense. The Sicilian enterprise 
had in some respects another character. By the time it began 
the freebooters had grown into princes. Sicily was won by a 
duke of Apulia and a count of Sicily. 1 Still there was a wide 
difference between the duke of the Normans and the duke of 
Apulia, between an hereditary prince of a hundred and fifty 
years' standing and an adventurer who had carved out his 
duchy for himself. And, besides this, warfare in Sicily brought 
in higher motives and objects. Though crusades had "not yet 
been preached, the strife with the Mussulman at once brought 
in the crusading element; to the Christian people of the island 
they were in many cases real deliverers; still, the actual process 
by which Sicily was won was not so very different from that by 
which Apulia had been won. Duke William was undisputed 
master of England at the end of five years; it took Count Roger 
thirty years to make himself undisputed master of Sicily. The 
one claimed an existing kingdom, and obtained full possession 
of it in a comparatively short time; the other formed for 
himself a dominion bit by bit, which rose to the rank of a kingdom 

	1 Roger de Hauteville, the conqueror of Sicily, was a brother of 
	the first four dukes or counts of Apulia, and was invested with the 
	countship of Sicily by the pope before starting on his adventure. 

in the next generation. When Count Roger at last found himself 
lord of the whole island, he found himself lord of men of various 
creeds and tongues, of whom his own Norman followers were 
but one class out of several. And the circumstances of his 
conquest were such that the true Normans among his following 
could not possibly lose themselves among the existing inhabitants 
of the island, while everything tended to make them lose 
themselves among their fellow-adventurers of other races, 
among whom, by the time the conquest was ended, they could 
hardly have been even a dominant element. 

As far then as concerned the lands in which the settlements 
were made, the difference lay in this, that, as has been already said, 
while there was an English nation, there was no Sicilian nation. 
The characteristic point of Norman rule in Sicily is that it is 
the rule of princes who were foreign to all the inhabitants of 
the island, but who were not more foreign to the inhabitants of 
the island than different classes of them were to one another. 
The Norman conqueror found in Sicily a Christian and Greek- 
speaking people and a Mussulman and Arabic-speaking people. 
The relations between the two differed widely in different parts 
of the island, according to the way in which the Saracens had 
become possessed of different towns and districts. In one place 
the Christians were in utter bondage, in another they were simply 
tributary; still, everywhere the Mussulman Saracen formed the 
ruling class, the Christian Greek formed the subject class. We 
speak of the Saracen very much as we speak of the Norman; 
for of the Mussulman masters of Sicily very many must have 
been only artificial Arabs, Africans who had adopted the creed, 
language and manners of Arabia. In each case the Arab or the 
Norman was the kernel, the centre round which all other elements 
gathered and which gave its character to the whole. Besides 
these two main races, Greek and Saracen, others came in through 
the Norman invasion itself. There were the conquerors them- 
selves; there were the Italians, in Sicily known as Lombards, 
who followed in their wake; there were also the Jews, whom 
they may have found in the island, or who may have followed 
the Norman into Sicily, as they certainly followed him into 
England. The special character of Norman rule in Sicily was 
that all these various races flourished, each in its own fashion, 
each keeping its own creed, tongue and manners, under the 
protection of a common sovereign, who belonged to none of them, 
but who did impartial justice to all. Such a state of things 
might seem degradation to the Mussulman, but it was deliverance 
to the native Christian, while to settlers of every kind from outside 
it was an opening such as they could hardly find elsewhere. 
But the growth of a united Sicilian nation was impossible; 
the usual style to express the inhabitants of the island is" omnes " 
or " universi Siciliae populi." In the end something like a 
Sicilian nation did arise; but it arose rather by the dying out 
of several of the elements in the country, the Norman element 
among them, than by any such fusion as took place in England. 
That is, as has been already said, the Norman as such has 
vanished in two different ways. In England the Norman 
duke came in as a foreign intruder, without a native supporter 
to establish his rule over a single nation in its own land. He 
could not profess to be, as the count of Sicily could honestly 
profess to be, a deliverer to a large part of the people of the land. 
But, coming in by a title which professed to be founded on English 
law, establishing his followers by grants which professed no less 
to be founded on English law, he planted a dynasty, and estab- 
lished a dominant order, which could not fail to become English. 
The Normans in England did not die out; they were merged 
in the existing nation. The Normans in Sicily, so far as they 
did not die out, were merged, not in a Sicilian nation, for that 
did not exist, but in the common mass of settlers of Latin speech 
and rite, as distinguished from the older inhabitants, Greek 
and Saracen. The Norman conquest of England was at the 
moment a curse; the Norman conquest of Sicily was at the 
moment a blessing. But the gradual and indirect results of 
the Norman conquest of England are easily to be seen to this 
day, and they have been largely, though indirectly, results for 
good. Its chief result has been, not so much to create anything 
new as at once to modify and to strengthen what was old, to call 
up older institutions to a new life under other forms. But 
whatever it has done it has done silently; there has not been at 
any time any violent change of one set of institutions for another. 
In Sicily and southern Italy there is hardly any visible Norman 
influence, except the great historic fact which we may call the 
creation of Sicily and southern Italy in their modern sense. 
The coming of the Norman ruled that these lands should be 
neither Saracen nor Greek, nor yet Italian in the same sense 
as northern Italy, but that they should politically belong to 
the same group of states as the kingdoms and principalities of 
feudal Europe. William assuredly did not create the kingdom 
of England; Roger assuredly did create the kingdom of Sicily. 
And yet, notwithstanding all this, and partly because of all 
this, real and distinct Norman influence has been far more 
extensive and far more abiding in England than it has been in 
Sicily. 

In Sicily then the circumstances of the conquest led the 
Norman settlers to remain far more distinct from the older races 
of the land than they did in England, and in the end to lose 
themselves, not in those older races of the land, but in the 
settlers of other races who accompanied and followed them. 
So far as there ever was a Sicilian nation at all, it might be said 
to be called into being by the emperor-king Frederick II. In 
his day a Latin element finally triumphed; but it was not a 
Norman or French-speaking element of any kind. The speech 
of the Lombards at last got the better of Greek, Arabic and 
French; how far its ascendancy can have been built on any 
survival of an earlier Latin speech which had lived on alongside 
of Greek and Arabic this is not the place to inquire. 

The use of language and nomenclature during the time of Norman 
rule in the two countries forms a remarkable contrast, and illustrates 
the circumstances of the two as they have just been 
sketched. The chroniclers of the conquest of Apulia U gcof 
and Sicily use the Norman name in every page as the name f n S ia f es A 
of the followers of the conquerors from Hauteville. It in ^ Iaad 
was the natural name for a body of men who must, by Vj J 1 * 
the time the conquest of Sicily was over, have been c ^* 
very mixed, but_ whose kernel was Norman, whose strength and 
feelings and traditions all came from a Norman source. But if we 
tuin to Hugo Falcandus, the historian of Sicily in the 12th century, 
the Norman name is hardly found, unless when it is used historically 
to point out (as in Muratori vii. 260) that the royal house of Sicily 
was of Norman descent. Of the various " Siciliae populi," we hear of 
Greeks, Saracens, Lombards, sometimes of Franci, for by that time 
there were many French-speaking settlers in Sicily who were not of 
Norman descent. There is a distinction between Christians and 
Saracens; among Christians there seems to be again a distinction 
between Greeks and Latins, though perhaps without any distinct 
use of the Latin name; there is again a further distinction between 
11 Lombardi " and "Franci"; but Normans, as a separate class, 
do not appear. In England there is no room for such subtleties. 
The narratives of the conquest of England use both the Norman and 
the French names to express the followers of William. In the English 
chronicles " French " is the only name used. It appears also in the 
Bayeux^ Tapestry, and it is the only word used when any legal 
distinction had to be drawn between classes of men in the English 
kingdom. " Franci " and " Angli " are often opposed in Domesday 
and otherdocuments, and the formula went on in charters long after 
all real distinction had passed away. That is to say, there were 
several purposes for which it was convenient to distinguish "English" 
and " French " — the last name taking in all the followers of the 
Conqueror; there were no purposes for which there was any need to 
distinguish Normans as such, either from the general mass of the 
people or from others who spoke the French tongue. We can see 
also that, though several languages were in use in England during 
the time of Norman rule, yet England was not a land of many 
languages in the same sense in which Sicily was. In the 12th century 
three languages were certainly spoken in London; vet London 
could not call itself the " city of threefold speech," as Palermo did. 
English, French, Latin, were all in use in England; but the distinc- 
tion was rather that they were used for three different purposes 
than that they were used by three distinct races or even classes. 
No doubt there was a class that knew only English ; there may have 
been a much smaller class that knew only French; any man who 
pretended to high cultivation would speak all as a matter of course; 
ishop Gilbert Foliot, for instance, was eloquent in all three. But in 
Sicily we see the quite different phenomenon of three, four, five classes 
of men living side by side, each keeping its own nationality and speak- 
ing its own tongue. If a man of one people knew the speech of any 
of the others, he knew it strictly as a foreign language. Before the 
Norman Conquest England had two official tongues; documents 
were drawn up sometimes in English, sometimes in Latin, now and 
then in both. And the same usage went on after the Conquest; 
the use of English becomes gradually rarer, and dies out under the 
first Angevins, but it is in favour of Latin that it dies out. French, 
the language which the Normans brought with them, did not become 
an official language in England till after strictly Norman rule had 
passed away. French documents are unknown till the days of French 
Fashion had come in, that is, till deep in the 13th century. So it was 
in Sicily also; of all the tongues of Sicily French was the most 
needful in the king's^ court (" Francorum lingua quae maxime 
necessaria esset in curia," says Hugo Falcandus, 321); but it was 
not an official tongue. ^ The three tongues of Palermo are Greek, 
Arabic and Latin. King Roger's clock is commemorated in all 
three. Documents were drawn up in such and so many of these 
tongues as was convenient for the parties concerned; not a few 
private documents add a fourth tongue, and are drawn up in Greek, 
Arabic, Latin and Hebrew. In neither case is the actual speech of 
the conquerors one of the tongues in formal use. French, as a separate 
tongue from Latin, already existed as a literary speech, and no 
people had done more than the Normans to spread it as a literary 
speech, in both prose and verse. But neither in England nor in Sicily 
did official formalism acknowledge even French, much less Italian, 
as a fit tongue for solemn documents. In England, English, French, 
Latin, were the three tongues of a single nation; they were its 
vulgar, its courtly and its learned speeches, of which three the courtly 
was fast giving way to the vulgar. In Sicily, Greek, Arabic, Latin 
and its children were the tongues of distinct nations ; French might 
be the politest speech, but neither Greek nor Arabic could be set 
down as a vulgar tongue, Arabic even less than Greek. 

The different positions then which the conquering Norman 
took in his two great conquests of England and of Sicily amply 
illustrate the way in which he could adapt himself 
Normans to anv circumstances in which he found himself, 
Scotland, tne wa y * n which he could adopt whatever suited 
his purpose in the institutions of any other people, 
the way in which he commonly lost his national being in that 
of some other people. From England, moreover, he spread into 
Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and in each land his settlement 
put on a somewhat different character, according to the circum- 
stances of the land. In Scotland he was not a conqueror, but 
a mere visitor, and oddly enough he came as a visitor along 
with those whom he had himself overcome in England. Both 
Normans and English came to Scotland in crowds in the days 
of Margaret, Edgar and David, and Scottish national feeling 
sometimes rose up against them. In Scotland again the Norman 
settlers were lost in the mixed nationality of the country, but 
not till they had modified many things in the same way in which 
they modified things in England. They gave Scotland nobles 
and even kings; Bruce and Balliol were both of the truest 
Norman descent; the true Norman descent of Comyn might 
be doubted, but he was of the stock of the Francigenae of the 
Conquest. In Wales the Norman came as a conqueror, 
more strictly a conqueror than in England; he could 
not claim Welsh crowns or Welsh estates under any fiction of 
Welsh law. The Norman settler in Wales, therefore, did not to any 
perceptible extent become a Welshman; the existing relations 
of England and Wales were such that he in the end became 
an Englishman, but he seems not unnaturally to have been 
somewhat slower in so doing in Wales than he was in England. 
At least Giraldus Cambrensis, the Norman Welshman or Welsh 
Norman, was certainly more alive to the distinction between 
Normans and English than any other of his contemporaries. In 
Ireland the Norman was more "purely a conqueror 
than anywhere else; but in Ireland his power of 
adaptation caused him to sink in a way in which he sank nowhere 
else. While some of the Norman settlers in Ireland went to swell 
the mass of the English of the Pale, others threw in their lot 
with the native Irish, and became, in the well-known saying, 
Hibernis ipsis Hiberniores (see e.g. the article Burgh). 

There is yet one point in which we may profitably go back to our 
comparison between England and Sicily. Both countries are rich 
in works of architecture raised during the time of Norman 
htf ru ' e * ^ nc * tne buildings of both lands throw an instructive 
architect jj g j lt on t j ie Gorman national character, as we have 
fi ;°rf described it. Few buildings, at least few buildings raised 
and km in anjr reasona ble style of architecture which makes use 
Sicily 1 °* tne arcn ed construction, can be less like one another 
y * # t than the buildings of the Norman kings in England and 
the buildings of the Norman kings in Sicily. In Sicily the Normans 

	Wales. 
	Ireland, 

found the two most outwardly civilized of the nations of Europe, 
the two which had as yet carried the arts to the highest pitch. The 
Greek had created the column; the Roman had developed it; the 
Roman Greek or Greek Roman had taught the column to bear the 
cupola; the Saracen had taught it to bear arches of his own favourite 
pointed shape. Out of these elements the Saracens of Sicily had 
formed a noble and beautiful style, grand and simple in its con- 
struction, rich and graceful in its characteristic detail. With the 
Saracen and the Greek ashis subjects, the Norman had really no 
need to innovate ; he had simply to bid the men of the land to go on 
working for him instead of for any other. The palaces and churches 
of the Norman kings at Palermo and Monrealeand Cefalu and Messina 
are in styte simply Saracenic; they were most likely the work ol 
Saracen builders; they were beyond doubt built after Saracenic 
models. In these builciings, as hvthose of A<juitaine, the pointed arch 
is the surest sign of Saracenic influence; it must never be looked 
on as marking the approach of the Gothic of the North. With that 
form of art the pointed style of Sicily has nothing in common. A 
Sicilian church has nothing in common with a French or an English 
church; it is sometimes purely Oriental, sometimes a basilica with 
pointed arches. But, if the Saracen gave the lines of the building, 
the Greek gave the mosaic decorations of its walls. In such a case 
the ruling people, rather the ruling dynasty, had really nothing to 
add to what they found ready for them. They had simply to make 
Saracen and Greek work in partnership. In England, on the other 
hand, the Normans did really bring in a new style of their own, their 
own form of Romanesque, differing widely indeed from, the Saracenic 
style of Sicily. This Norman form of Romanesque most Hkely had 
its origin in the Lombard buildings of northern Italy. But it took 
firm root on Norman soil ; it made its way to England at an early 
stage of its growth, and from that time it^went on developing and 
improving on both sides of the Channel till the artistic revolution 
came by which, throughout northern Europe, the Romanesque styles 
gave way to the Gothic. Thus the history of architecture in England 
during the nth and 12th centuries is a very different story from 
the history of the art in Sicily during the same time. There were no 
Greeks or Saracens in England; there was no Greek or Saracen 
skin. England indeed had, possibly in a somewhat ruder form, the 
earlier style of Romanesque once common to England with Italy, 
Gaul and Germany. To this style it is no wonder that the Normans 
preferred their own, and that style therefore supplanted the older 
one. A comparison of Norman buildings^ in England and in Nor- 
mandy will show that the Norman style in Engla nd really was affected 
by the earlier style of England ; but the modification was very slight, 
and it in no way affected the general character of the style. Thus, 
while the institutions of England in the 12th century were English 
with very considerable Norman modifications, the architecture of 
England jn that century was 'Norman with a very slight English 
modification. The difference then is^ plain. Where, as in Sicily, 
the Normans felt that they could not improve, they simply adopted 
the style of the country. Where, as in England, they felt that they 
could improve, they substituted for the style of the country their 
own style — that is, a style which they had not created but which 
they had adopted, which they had made thoroughly their own, and 
which they went on improving in England no less than in Normandy. 
That is, the discerning Norman, as ever, adapted himself, but 
adapted himself in an intelligent way, to the circumstances of each 
land in which he found himself. And this comes out the more clearly 
if we compare Norman work in England and in Sicily with Norman 
work in at least some parts of Apulia. At Bari, Trani and Bitonto 
we see a style in which Italian and strictly Norman elements are 
really mingled. The great churches of those cities are wholly unlike 
those of Sicily; but, while some features show us that we are in 
Italy, while some features even savour of the Saracen, others dis- 
tinctly carry us away to Caen and Peterborough. # It is plain that the 
Norman settlers in Apulia were not so deeply impressed with the 
local style as they were in Sicily, while they thought much more of 
it than they thought of the local style of England. In each of the 
three cases there is adaptation, but the amount of adaptation differs 
in each case according to local circumstances. In Normandy itself, 
after the separation from England,' architecture becomes French, but 
it is French of a remarkably good type. The buildings of the latest 
French style keep a certain purity and sobriety in Normandy which 
they do not keep elsewhere. (E. A. F.) 

For a bibliography of the Normans and Northmen see Ulysse 
Chevalier, Repertoire des sources hist, du moyen-dge. Topobibhogr. 
(Montbeliard, 1903), ii. 2140; also, for sources for the Norman in- 
vasion of France, Molinier, Sources de VhisL de France (Paris, 1901), 
i. 264. Many sources for the history of the Normans were collected 
by Andre Du Chesne in his Hist. Normannorum scriptores antiqui , . . 
838-1220, &c. (Paris, 1 61 9). Of modern works may be mentioned 
H. Dondorff, Die Normannen und ihre Bedeutung fur das europaische 
Kulturleben im Mittelalter (Berlin, 1875); A. H. Johnson, The 
Normans in Europe (1877); E. A. Freeman, Hist, of the Norman 
Conquest (Oxford, 1867-1879) and Hist, of Sicily (1891-1894); 
O..Delarc, Les Normands en Italic, 859-1073 (Paris, 1883); J. W. 
Barlow, Short Hist, of the Normans in S. Europe (London, 1886); 
A. F. von Schack, Gesch. der Normannen in Sicilien (Stuttgart, 
1889); L. von Heinemann, Gesch. der Normannen in Unteritalien 
und Sicilien (Leipzig, 1894); W. Vogel, Die Normannen und das 
frdnkische Reich, 79Q-$ti (1906); F. Chalandon, La Dominion 
normande en Italie et Sidle, zooQ-iigd (Paris, 1907); F. Lot, " La 
Grande Invasion normande, 856-862/' in t. 69 of the Bibtiotheque 
del'Mcole des Charles (Paris, 1908). 


NORMANTON, a town of Normanton county, Queensland, 
Australia, on the river Norman, 25 m. E. by S. of the Gulf of 
Carpentaria, and 1382 m. direct N.W. of Brisbane. Pop. (1901) 
838. It is the centre of the Carpentaria district, one of the 
chief sheep and cattle farming districts in the colony. Nor- 
manton is also the outlet of the Croydon and Etheridge goldfields, 
and of the Cloncurry copper mines. It is the terminus of the 
railway to' Croydon, and has large meat-packing works. 


NORMANTON, an urban district in the Normanton parlia- 
mentary division of the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, 
on the river Calder, 3 m. N.E. of Wakefield on the Midland, 
North Eastern and Lancashire & Yorkshire railways. Pop. 
(1901) 12,352. The church of All Saints is Norman and Per- 
pendicular, with a square tower rebuilt in 17 17, and contains 
a number of interesting monuments; the ancient stained glass 
is good. The grammar-school was founded about the end of the 
16th century. Traces remain of a moat surrounding the town." 
A mound in the neighbourhood called Haw Hill is supposed 
to be a barrow. Altofts, a neighbouring parish, was the home of 
Sir Martin Frobisher in the 16th century. There are numerous 
collieries in the neighbourhood, 


NORNS (0. Norse, Nornir), in Northern mythology, the 
female divinities of fate, somewhat similar to the Gr. Motpcu 
and the Roman Parcae. Like them they are generally lepre- 
sented as three in number, and they are said to spin, or weave, 
the destiny of men. Their dwelling is beside the " Spring of fate," 
beneath the " world-tree," Yggdrasil's ash, which they water 
with draughts from the spring. In some cases the Norns are 
not easily to be distinguished from the Valkyries (q.v.). Some- 
times again they appear as prophetesses (volur) at the birth of 
children, whose destiny they foretell. The most famous of 
these stories is contained in the Thdttr af Nornagesti, and has 
a curious resemblance to the Greek legend of Althaea and 
Meleager, Similar beings seem to have been known among 
other Teutonic peoples in early times. (See Teutonic Peoples, 
§ 7). (H. M. C.) 


NORRIS, FRANK (1870-1002), American novelist, was born 
in Chicago, Illinois, on the 5th of March 1870. He studied art 
in Paris in 1887-1889; studied at the University of California 
(1890-1894), and at Harvard University (1894-1895); in 1895- 
1896 served in South Africa as war correspondent for the 
San Francisco Chronicle; in 1896-1897 was associate editor of 
the San Francisco Wave-, and in 1898 was sent to Cuba as 
war correspondent for McChtre's Magazine. He died in San 
Francisco on the 25th of October 1902. He wrote A Deal in 
Wheat } and Other Stories (1903), Responsibilities of the Novelist, 
and Other Literary Essays (1903), and the following novels: 
M'oran of the Lady Letty (1898), a story of adventure off the 
California coast; McTeague (1899), a story of the San Francisco 
slums; Blix (1899), a love story; A Man's Woman (1900); 
The Octopus (1901) and The Pit (1903). The last two were 
powerful stories, which made his reputation. * The Octopus deals 
with wheat-raising in California and with the struggle between 
the growers and the railroad trust; The Pit with wheat-specula- 
tion in the Chicago market. His complete works were published 
in seven volumes in 1903. 


NORRIS, HENRY NORRIS or Norreys, Baron (c. 1525-1601), 
belonged to an old Berkshire family, many members of which 
had held positions at the English court. His father, Henry 
Norris, was a grandson of Sir William Norris, who commanded 
the royal troops against Lambert Simnel at the battle of Stoke 
in 1487, Like his brother John (d, 1564), the elder Henry 
Norris obtained a post at the court of Henry VIII.; he gained 
the king's favour and was rewarded with many lucrative offices. 
He belonged to the party which favoured the elevation of 
Anne Boleyn; but in May 1536 he was arrested on the charge 
of intriguing with her, and though he was probably innocent 
of any serious offence he was beheaded on the 17th of May 1536. 

His son Henry regained some of his father's lands and entered 
upon court life, being a member of parliament under Edward 
VI. During Mary's reign he was one of those who were entrusted 
with the custody of the princess Elizabeth, and when the princess 
became queen she amply repaid the kindness which Norris had 
shown to her when he was her guardian at Woodstock. In 
1566 he was knighted and was sent as ambassador to France, 
where he remained until 1570, and in 1572 he was created 
Baron Norris of Rycote. He died in June 1601. By his wife 
Margaret (d. 1599), daughter of John, Lord Williams of Thame, 
Norris itad six sons, all of whom distinguished themselves in 
the field. The Norris monument, with figures of Lord and Lady 
Norris and their six sons, is in St Andrew's Chapel in Westminster 
Abbey. 

The eldest son, Sir William Norris, died in Ireland in 
December 1579, leaving a son Francis (1 570-1623), who succeeded 
to his grandfather's barony and also to the estates of his uncle Sir 
Edward Norris. In 162 1 Francis was created earl of Berkshire. 
He left no sons and the earldom became extinct, but the barony 
descended to his daughter Elizabeth (d, 1645), the wife oi Edward 
Wray (d. 1658). Their daughter Bridget (1627-1657) married 
as his second wife Montagu Bertie, 2nd earl of Lindsey, and 
their son James Bertie (1654-1699) became Baron Norris (or 
Norreys) in 1657, and was created earl of Abingdon in 1682. 
His descendants the Berries, earls of Abingdon, still hold this 
barony, and are the present representatives of the family of 
Norris. 

Sir Edward Norris (d. 1603), the 1st Lord Norris's third 
son, served with the English troops in the Netherlands from 1585 
to 1588. He is chiefly remembered owing to his fierce quarrel 
with Philip, count of Hohenlohe (1550-1606), called Hollock 
by the English, in August 1586 at Gertruydenberg (see J, L, 
Motley, The United Netherlands, vol, ii.). In 1589 he sailed 
with his brother Sir John and Sir Francis Drake on the expedi- 
tion to Spain and Portugal, and from 1590 to 1599 he was 
governor of Ostend. 

Sir Thomas Norris (1556-1599), another son of the first lord, 
went as a soldier to Ireland in 1579 and acted for a few months 
as president of Connaught. He fought against the Fitzgeralds 
and also in Ulster; in 1585 he became vice-president of Munster, 
and in 1597 he succeeded his brother, Sir John Norris, as presi- 
dent. The three remaining brothers were: Sir Henry Norris 
(1554-1599), who fought in the Netherlands and then in Ireland, 
where he was killed in 1599; Maximitian Norris, who was 
killed in Brittany in 1593, and Sir John Norris (q.v.). 

Two other members of another branch of this family remain to be 
mentioned, namely, Sir William Norris and his brother Sir John. 

Sir William Norris (c. 1657-1702), having been created a 
baronet, was sent in 1699 to the Mogul emperor in India to secure 
trading privileges for the new company which had been just formed 
to compete with the old East India Company.! He reached India in 
September 1699, and after overcoming many difficulties he arrived 
at the emperor's residence in April 1701. The embassy, however, 
was a total failure; Norris was unable to make terms, and he died 
on the voyage to England. 

Sir John Norris {c. 1 660-1 749) entered the navy and saw a good 
deal of service during the war with France under William III. and 
Anne. Under George I. he was sent several times with a fleet into 
the Baltic Sea to forward the policy of this king by giving the 
northern nations some idea of tne strength of England. In 1734 
he became an admiral and commander-in-chief. Norris, who was 
known as " foul- weather Jack," was a member of parliament from 
1708 until his death, 


NORRIS, JOHN (1657-1711), English philosopher and divine, 
was born at Collingbourne-Kingston in Wiltshire. He was 
educated at Winchester and Exeter College, Oxford, being 
subsequently elected to a fellowship at All Souls'. His first 
original work was An Idea of Happiness (1683), in which, with 
Plato, he places the highest happiness or fruition of the soul 
in the contemplative love of God. Malebranche's Recherche de 
la veriti, which had appeared in 1674, made a strong impression 
upon him, Malebranche, he says, " is indeed the great Galileo 
of the intellectual world." He had also studied the works of 
Descartes himself, and most of what had been written for and 
against Cartesianism. Of English thinkers, More and Cudworth, 
the so-called Cambridge Platonists, had influenced him most; 
and in 1685 his study of their works led to a- correspondence 
with the former, published after his death by Norris as an 
appendix to his Platonically conceived essay on The Theory 
and Regulation of Love (1688). He also corresponded with Mrs 
Astell (q.v.) and Lady Masham, the friend of Locke, to whom 
he addressed his Reflections upon the Conduct of Huma?t Life 
(1689). Some time before this Norris had taken orders, and in 
1689 he was presented to the living of Newton St Loe, in Somer- 
setshire. In 1600 he published a volume of Discourses upon 
the Beatitudes, followed by three more volumes of Practical 
Discourses between 1600 and 1698. The year 1690 is memorable 
as the year of the publication of Locke's Essay, and the book 
came into Norris's hands just as his volume of Discourses was 
passing through the press. He at once appreciated its import- 
ance, but its whole temper was alien from the modes of thought 
in which he had been reared, and its main conclusions moved 
him to keen dissent. He hastened to " review " it in an appendix 
to his sermons. These Cursory Reflections constitute Norris 
the first critic of the Essay; and they anticipate some of the 
arguments that have since been persistently urged against 
Locke from the transcendental side. Though holding to the 
" grey-headed, venerable doctrine " of innate ideas as little 
as Locke himself, Norris finds the criticism in the first book 
of the Essay entirely inconclusive, and points out its incon- 
sistency with Locke's own doctrine of evident or intuitively 
perceived truths. He also suggests the possibility of subconscious 
ideation, on which Leibnitz laid so much stress in the same 
connexion. He next complains that Locke neglects to tell us 
" what kind of things these ideas are which are let in at the 
gate of the senses." In other words, while giving a metaphorical 
account of how we come by our ideas, Locke leaves unconsidered 
the intellectual nature of the ideas or of thought in itself. Unless 
we come to some conclusion on this point, Norris argues, we 
have little chance of being right in our theory of how ideas 
" come to be united to our mind." He also saw the weakness 
of Locke's doctrine of nominal essences, showing how it ignores 
the relation of the human mind to objective truth, and instancing 
mathematical figures as a case " where the nominal essence 
and the real essence are all one." The last twenty years of 
Norris's life were spent at Bemerton, near Salisbury, the former 
home of George Herbert, to the living of which he had been 
transferred in 1691. In 1691-1692 he was engaged in con- 
troversy with his old enemies the " Separatists," and with the 
Quakers, his Malebranchian theory of the divine illumination 
having been confounded by some with the Quaker doctrine 
of the light within. In 1697 he wrote An Account of Reason 
and Faith, one of the best of the many answers to Toland's 
Christianity not Mysterious. Norris adopts the distinction 
between things contrary to reason atid things above reason, 
and maintains that the human mind is not the measure of truth. 
Reason, according to him, is nothing but the exact measure of 
truth, that is to say, divine reason, which differs from human 
reason only in degree, not in nature. In 1701 appeared the 
first volume of the systematic philosophical work by which 
he is remembered, An Essay towards the Theory of the Ideal 
or Intelligible World. The first volume treats the intelligible 
world absolutely; the second, which appeared in 1704, considers 
it in relation to human understanding. It is a complete ex- 
position of the system of Malebranche, in which Norris refutes 
the assertions of Locke and the sensualists. In 1708 Norris' 
wrote A Philosophical Discourse concerning the Natural Im- 
mortality of the Soid, defending that doctrine against the assaults 
of DodweU. After this he wrote little. He died at Bemerton, 
and a monument was erected to his memory in the parish 
church, with an inscription in which he is spoken of as one who 
" bene latuit." 

Norris was neither an original thinker nor a master of style. His 
philosophy is hardly more than an English version of Malebranche, 
enriched by wide reading of " Platonic " thinkers of every age and 
country. His style is too scholastic and self-involved. His Theory 
of the intelligible World is an attempt to explain the objective nature 
of truth, which he blamed Locke for leaving out of regard. By the 
intelligible world Norris understands the system of ideas eternally 
existent in the mind of God, according to which the material creation 
was formed. This ideal system he identifies with the Logos — the 
second person of the Trinity, the light that lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world. For it is these ideas and their relations that 
are alone the object-matter of science; whenever we know, it is 
because they are present to our mind. Material things are wholly 
dark to us, except so far as the fact of their existence is revealed in 
sensation. The matter which we say that we know is the idea of 
matter, and belong^, like other ideas, to the intelligible world. 
When stripped s of its semi-mythical form of statement, Norris's 
emphatic assertion of the ideal nature of thought and its complete 
distinction from sense as such may be seen to contain an important 
truth. ^ As the disciple and correspondent of More, he is, in a sense, 
the heir of the Cambridge Platonists, while, as the first critic of 
Locke's Essay, he^ may be said to open the protest of the church 
against the implicit tendencies of that work. He occupies a place, 
therefore, in the succession of churchly and mystical thinkers of 
whom Coleridge is the last eminent example. 

See Wood, Athenae Oxonienses (ed. Bliss), iv.; Biographia Britan- 
nica ; Leslie Stephen in Dictionary of National Biography ; J. 
Tulloch, Rational 'Theology and Christian Philosophy in England 
in the ijth Century (1874), wno Q2 ^ i<& Norris " as staking and signifi- 
cant a figure in the history of English philosophy as another 
idealist, Berkeley. 

NORRIS, SIR JOlfif (c. 1547-1597), English soldier, was the 
second son of Henry Norris, Baron Norris of Rycote, and gained 
his earliest military experience in the civil wars ki France. In 
1573 he went to Ulster with Walter Devereux, earl of Essex, 
winning fame by his conduct in the guerilla wars against the 
Irish, and being responsible for the massacre on the island of 
Rathlin in July 1575; and in July 1577 he crossed over to the 
Netherlands to assist the Dutch against the Spaniards. Having 
added to his reputation by his valour at the battle of Rymenant, 
Norris returned to England in March 1584, and in the following 
July he was sent to Ireland as lord president of Munster; he 
accompanied the lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, on a campaign 
in Ulster, and spoke eloquently in the Irish parliament; but 
he disliked his work and soon obtained his recall. In August 

1585 he was again in the Netherlands, commanding the English 
army of 4400 men which Elizabeth had sent to serve against 
the Spaniards. During his successful relief of Grave in April 

1586 he was wounded, and just after this event he was knighted 
by the governor-general, the earl of Leicester; but he and 
Leicester were soon at variance, and many complaints of his 
conduct were sent to England. After taking part in the battle 
of Zutphen in October 1586 Sir John was recalled to England, 
but in 1587 he went again to the Netherlands and was soon 
quarrelling with his new superior, Peregrine Bertie, Lord Wil- 
loughby de Eresby, and with Sir William Stanley. In 1588, 
when the Spanish Armada was expected, he was marshal of the 
camp at Tilbury; later in the same year he served the queen as 
ambassador to the Dutch states, and in 1589 he and Sir Francis 
Drake led the fleet which ravaged the coasts of Spain and 
Portugal. In 1591, and again in 1593, he aided Henry IV. of 
France in his struggle with the League in Brittany; and in 
May 1595 he landed again in Ireland, where he was still lord 
president of Munster. But this time he was entrusted with 
more extensive powers and was to assist the lord deputy, Sir 
William Russell, in subjugating Ulster. He did not, however, 
work harmoniously with Russell; his health was failing and 
the gigantic task was too much for him. After fighting and 
negotiating with the O'Neills in Ulster, and warring in Connaught, 
he asked for his recall. This was not granted, but he was sup- 
planted hi his military command; and he retired to Munster 
and died at Mallow on the 3rd of July 1597. His monument 
is in the church of Tattendon, Berkshire. 

See J. L. Motley, The United Netherlands, vol. ii. (1904); and 
R. Bagwell, Ireland under the Tudor s f vol. iii. (1890). 


NORRIS, WILLIAM EDWARD (1847- ), English novelist, 
was born on the 18th of November 1847, the son of Sir W. Norris, 
chief justice of Ceylon. He was educated at Eton, and called 
to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1874. His first story, Heaps 
of Money, appeared in 1877, and was followed by a long series 
of novels, many of which first appeared in the Temple Bar and 
Cornhill magazines. The best of his numerous novels are 
Mademoiselle de Met sac (1880), Matrimony (1881), No New 
Thing (1883), My Friend Jim (1886), The Rogue (r888), The 
Despotic Lady (1895), Mattltew Austin (1895), Tlie Widower (1898), 
Nature's Comedian (1904), Pauline (1908). 


NORRISTOWN, a borough and the county-seat of Mont- 
gomery county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., on the Schuylkill river, 
at the mouth of Stony Creek, opposite Bridgeport, and about 
18 m. N.W. of Philadelphia. Pop. (1910 census) 27,875. 
Norristown is served by the Pennsylvania, the Philadelphia & 
Reading and the Stony Creek railways, by interurban electric 
railway to Philadelphia and Reading, and by the Schuylkill 
canal, and is connected by bridge with the borough of Bridge- 
port (pop. in 1910, 3860), where woollen and cotton goods 
are manufactured. Norristown is a residential suburb of 
Philadelphia, and commands fine views of the Schuylkill Valley. 
It has a State Hospital for the Insane (opened 1880), a fine 
County Court House, a general hospital, a Friends' Home, a 
home for aged women, St Joseph's Protectory (Roman Catholic) 
for girls, and the Norristown and McCann public libraries; in 
Montgomery cemetery are the tombs of General Winfield Scott 
Hancock and General John Frederick Hartranft (1 830-1 889), 
a distinguished Federal officer in the Civil War and governor 
of Pennsylvania in 18 73-1 8 79. Valley Forge is less than 6 m. 
distant to the W. The borough has a large trade with the 
surrounding country, which is well adapted to agriculture and 
abounds in limestone. Among Norristown's manufactures are 
hosiery and woollen goods; in 1905 its total factory product was 
valued at $5,925,243, an increase of 44-3% over the value in 
1900. Norristown was founded in 1785, and was named in 
honour of Isaac Norris (c. 1671-1735), a friend of William Penn 
and a member of the Pennsylvania legislature, who had owned 
the land on which the borough is built. Norristown was incor- 
porated as a borough in 181 2, and its boundaries were extended 
in 1853. 


NORRKOPING, a town and port of Sweden, in the district (Ian) 
of Ostergotland, 113 m. S.W. of Stockholm by the Malmo 
railway. Pop. (1880) 26,735; ( I 9°°) 41,008. It occupies both 
banks of the Motala,the wide and rapid emissary of lake Vetter, 
close to its outlet in the Bravik, an inlet of the Baltic. Having 
been burned by the Russians in 1719 and visited by further 
fires in 1812, 1822 and 1826, the whole town has a modern 
appearance, with wide and regular streets. 'Among the more- 
conspicuous buildings are St Olaf's church (erected by Gustavus 
Adolphus in 1616 and rebuilt in 1765-1767); St Hedvig's, 
built by the German colony in 1670; the town hall, dating from 
the beginning of the 19th century; the high school (1868), and 
technical and weaving schools. Norrkoping is the fourth town 
in population and industrial importance in Sweden. The falls 
in the river afford motive power to the cloth and cotton mills 
(spinning and weaving) — the staple industries — and to factories 
for sugar, paper, lithography, tobacco and carpets, joinery 
works and breweries. There are also shipbuilding yards and 
docks. Fine granite is quarried at.Grafversfors, 7^ m. N. The 
inlet of Bravik affords excellent harbour accommodation, with 
from $$ ft. to 17 J ft. of water below the bridges in the town. 
The town returns two members to the second chamber of the 
Riksdag (parliament). 

A bull of Pope Lucius III. shows that Norrkoping existed in 
1 185. At the meeting of the states in 1604 Duke Charles assumed 
the Swedish crown as Charles IX.; and not long afterwards 
Duke John of Ostergotland introduced German craftsmen into 
Norrkoping, and thus originated its industrial activity. Under 
Charles XII. the town suffered not only from war but from 
pestilence, 2700 of its inhabitants perishing in 1710-1711. 
After the Russian invasion of 1719 the population was only 
'2600. 


NORTH, BARONS. The English title of Lord North of 
Kirtling was created for Edward North (c. 1496-1564), son of 
Roger North, a London citizen, in 1554; he was a successful 
lawyer, clerk of the parliament (1531) and chancellor of the court 
of augmentations (1545). His second son was Sir Thomas North 
(q.v.), and he was succeeded as 2nd baron by his son Roger (1 530- 
1600), a prominent courtier and soldier of Queen Elizabeth's 
day, who married the daughter of Lord Chancellor Rich, and 
whose eldest son, Sir John (c. 1 551-1597), predeceased him. 

Dudley North, 3rd Baron North (1581-1666), son of Sir 
John North and of Dorothy, daughter and heiress of Sir Valentine 
Dale, was born in 1581 and succeeded his grandfather, the 2nd 
Baron North, at the age of nineteen. He was educated at 
Cambridge, and married in 1599 Frances, daughter of Sir John 
Brockett of Brockett Hall in Hertfordshire. He travelled in 
Italy, took part in the campaign of 1602 in the Netherlands, 
and on his return became a conspicuous figure at court, excelling 
in athletic exercises as well as in poetry and music, and gaining 
the friendship of Prince Henry. In 1606, while returning from 
Eridge to London, he discovered the springs of Tunbridge Wells, 
which cured North himself of a complaint and quickly became 
famous. He also recommended the Epsom springs to the public. 
He supported and subscribed to the expedition to Guiana made 
by his brother Roger North (c. 1582-c. 1652) in 1619, and when 
Roger departed without leave Dudley was imprisoned for two 
days in the Fleet. In 1626 he attached himself to the party of 
Lord Saye and Sele in the Lords, who were in sympathy with the 
aims of the Commons; and when the civil war broke out he was 
on the side of the parliament. In 1641 he was a member of the 
Lords' committee on Religion, and served on the committee to 
consider Laud's attainder in 1644, finally voting for the ordinance 
in January 1645. He was placed on the admiralty commission 
in 1645, and acted as lord lieutenant for Cambridgeshire. He 
was one of the small group of Lords who continued attendance 
in the House of Peers, and on the 19th of December 1648, with 
three others, visited Fairfax, when they " cast down their honours 
at his Excellency's feet " and protested their desire not to retain 
any privileges prejudicial to the public interest. * He passed 
the rest of his life in retirement at Kirtling in Cambridgeshire, 
with his sons, daughters and grandchildren, finding " employ- 
ment with many airy entertainments as poetry, writing essays, 
building, making mottoes and inscriptions as well as in music." 2 
He wrote A Forest of Varieties (1645), a miscellany of essays and 
poems, another edition of which was published in 1659 under 
the title of A Forest promiscuous of various Seasons' Productions. 
He died on the 16th of January 1666. North is described as 
" full of spirit and flame," of imperious temper but of well- 
balanced judgment, Lord Holland declaring that " he knew no 
man less swayed with passion and sooner carried with reason and 
justice." He left, besides one daughter, two sons, the elder of 
whom, Sir Dudley, succeeded him as 4th Baron North. 

Dudley North, 4th Baron North (1602-1677), increased 
the family fortune by marrying the daughter of Sir Charles 
Montagu, brother of the 1st earl of Manchester. He was an 
accomplished man, of studious bent, and had fourteen children, 
of whom the third son, Francis, became lord chancellor as 
Lord Guilford; the fourth was Sir Dudley North (q.v.), the 
economist; the fifth, John (1 645-1 683), master of Trinity, 
Camhridge, and professor of Greek in the university; and the 
sixth, Roger (q.v.), the lawyer and historian. 

The eldest son, Charles (d. 1691), was created Lord Grey 
of Rolleston during his father's life, and succeeded his father 
as 5th Baron North; and on the death of his son, William, 
6th Lord North, without issue, in 1734, the barony of North 
went to a cousin, Francis North, 3rd* baron, afterwards 1st 
earl of Guilford. The title of Lord North is that by which the 
2nd earl of Guilford, prime minister from 1770 to 1782, is best 
known in history (see Guilford, Barons and Earls of). 

George Augustus, 3rd earl of Guilford (d. 1802), left three 
daughters, and the barony of North fell into abeyance till 1841 
when it vested in Susan, Baroness North (1797-1884), wife of 
John Sidney Doyle, who took the name of North; at her death 
her son William Henry John North (b. 1836) succeeded as nth 
baron, the title now being separate from that of Guilford. 


NORTH, SIR DUDLEY (1641-1691), English economist, 
was 4th son of Dudley, 4th Lord North, who published, 
besides other things, Passages relating to the Long Parliament, 

	1 Gardiner's Civil War, iv. 285. 

	2 Roger North's Autobiography, ed. by A. Jessopp, 68. 

of which he had himself been a member. He was born on the 
16th of May 1641. In his early years he was carried off by 
gipsies and recovered with some difficulty by his family — an 
incident curiously similar. to that which befell Adam Smith in 
his infancy. He engaged in foreign trade, especially with 
Turkey, and spent a number of years at Constantinople and 
Smyrna. Some notices of the manners and customs of the east 
were printed from his papers by his brother. Having retuined 
to London with a considerable fortune, he continued to prosecute 
trade with the Levant. His ability and knowledge of commerce 
attracted the attention of the government, and he was further 
recommended by the influence of his brother Lord Guilford. 
During the Tory reaction under Charles II. he was one of the 
sheriffs forced on the city of London with an express view to 
securing verdicts for the crown in state trials. He was knighted, 
and was appointed a commissioner of customs, afterwards of 
the treasury, and again of the customs. Having been elected 
a member of parliament under James II., " he took," says 
Roger North, " the place of manager for the crown in all matters 
of revenue." After the Revolution he was called to account 
for his alleged unconstitutional proceedings in his office of 
sheriff. He died on the 31st of December 169 1. 

His tract entitled Discourses upon Trade % principally directed 
to the cases of the interest , coinage^ clipping and increase of money, 
was published anonymously in 1691, and was edited in 1856 by 
J. R. M'Culloch in the Select Collection of Early English Tracts 
on Commerce printed by the Political Economy Club of London. 
In this thorough-going and emphatic assertion of the free-trade 
doctrine against the system of prohibitions which had gained 
strength by the Revolution, North shows that wealth may 
exist independently of gold or silver, its source being human 
industry, applied either to the cultivation of the soil or to 
manufactures. It is a mistake to suppose that stagnation of 
trade arises from want of money; it must arise either from a 
glut of the home market, or from a disturbance of foreign 
commerce, or from diminished consumption caused by poverty. 
The export of money in the course of traffic, instead of diminish- 
ing, increases the national wealth, trade being only an exchange 
of superfluities. Nations are related to the world just in the 
same way as cities to the state or as families to the city. North 
emphasizes more than his predecessors the value of the home 
trade. With respect to the interest of capital, he maintains that 
it depends, like the price of any commodity, on the proportion 
of demand and supply, and that a low rate is a result of the 
relative increase of capital, and cannot be brought about by 
arbitrary regulations, as had been proposed by Sir Josiah Child 
and others. In arguing the question of free trade, he urges that 
every advantage given to one interest over another is injurious 
to the public. No trade is unprofitable to the public; if it 
were, it would be given up; when trades thrive, so does the 
public, of which they form a part. Prices must determine 
themselves, and cannot be fixed by law; and all forcible inter- 
ference with them does harm instead of good. No people can 
become rich by state regulations, — only by peace, industry, 
freedom and unimpeded economic activity. It will be seen 
how closely North's view of things approach to that embodied 
some eighty years later in Adam Smith's great work. North 
is named by Wilhelm Roscher as one of that " great triumvirate " 
which in the 17 th century raised the English school of economists 
to the foremost place in Europe, the other members of the 
group being Locke and Petty. 


NORTH, MARIANNE (1830-1800), English naturalist and 
flower-painter, was born at Hastings on the 24th of October 1830, 
the eldest daughter of a Norfolk landowner, descended from 
Roger North (1653- 1734). She trained as a vocalist under 
Madame Sainton Dolby, but her voice failed, and she then devoted 
herself to painting flowers. After the death of her mother in 
1855 she constantly travelled with her father, who was then 
member of parliament for Hastings; and on his death in 1869 
she resolved to realize her early ambition of painting the flora 
of distant countries. In 1871-1872 with this object she went 
to Canada, the United States and Jamaica, and spent a year 
in Brazil, where she did much of her work at a hut in the depths 
of a forest. In 1875, a ^ ter a few months at Teneriffe, she began 
a journey round the world, and for two years was occupied in 
painting the flora of California, Japan, Borneo, Java and Ceylon. 
The year 1878 she spent in India, and after her return she 
exhibited a number of her drawings in London. Her subsequent 
offer to present the collection to the botanical gardens at Kew, 
and to erect a gallery for their reception, was accepted, and the 
new buildings, designed by James Ferguson, were begun in the 
same year. At Darwin's suggestion she went to Australia in 
1880, and for a year painted there and in New Zealand. Her 
gallery at Kew was opened in 1882. In 1883, after a visit by 
her to South Africa, an additional room was opened at the Kew 
gallery, and in 1884-1885 she worked at Seychelles and in Chile. 
Miss North died at Alderly in Gloucestershire on the 30th of August 
1890. The scientific accuracy with which she represented plant 
life in all parts of the world gives her work a permanent value. 

NORTH, ROGER (1653-1734), English lawyer and biographer, 
was the sixth son of the 4th Baron North. He acquired a good 
practice at the bar, being helped by his elder brother Francis, 
who became lord chancellor and was created Baron Guilford 
(q.v.), and in 1684 he became solicitor-general. But the Revolu- 
tion stopped his advancement, and he retired to his estate of 
Rougham in Norfolk, and increased his fortune by marrying 
the daughter of Sir Robert Gayer. He collected books, and 
was constantly occupied in writing. But he is best known 
for his Lives of the Norths, published after his death, together 
with his own autobiography (see the edition in Bohn's Standard 
Library, 1890, by Jessopp), a classic authority for the period. 
He died at Rougham on the 1st of March 1734, leaving a family 
from whom the Norths of Rougham are descended. 

He is to be distinguished from Roger North (1585-1652), brother 
of the 3rd baron, one of the captains who sailed with Raleigh in 1617, 
who projected the plantation of Guiana with an English colony. 


NORTH, SIR THOMAS (i53S?-i6oi?), English translator of 
Plutarch, second son of the 1st Baron North, was born about 
1535. He is supposed to have been a student of Peterhouse, 
Cambridge, and was entered at Lincoln's Inn in 1557. In 1574 
he accompanied his brother, Lord North, on a visit to the French 
court. He served as captain in the year of the Armada, and was 
knighted about three years later. His name is on the roll of 
justices of the peace for Cambridge in 1592 and again in 1597, 
and he received a small pension (£40 a year) from the queen 
in 1601. A third edition of his Plutarch was published, in 
1603, with a supplement of other translated biographies. He 
translated, in 1557, Guevara's Rcloj de Principes (commonly 
known as Libro Aureo), a compendium of moral counsels chiefly 
compiled from the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, under the 
title of Diall of Princes. The English of tliis work is one of the 
earliest specimens of the ornate, copious and pointed style for 
which educated young Englishmen had acquired a taste in their 
Continental travels and studies. North translated from a French 
copy of Guevara, but seems to have been well acquainted with 
the Spanish version. The book had already been translated 
by Lord Berners, but without reproducing the rhetorical artifices 
of the original. North's version, with its mannerisms and its 
constant use of antithesis, set the fashion which was to culminate 
in Lyly's Euphues. His next work was The Morall PhUosophie 
of Doni (1570), a translation of an Italian collection of eastern 
fables. The first edition of his translation of Plutarch, from the 
French of Jacques Amyot, appeared in 1579. The first edition 
was dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, and was followed by other 
editions in 1595 and 1603, containing in each case fresh Lives, 
It is almost, impossible to over-estimate the influence of North's 
vigorous English on contemporary writers, and some critics have 
called him the first master of English prose. The book formed 
the source from which Shakespeare drew the materials for his 
Julius Caesar, Coriolanus and Antony and Cleopatra. It is in 
the last-named play that he follows the Lives most closely, 
whole speeches being taken direct from North. 

North's Plutarch was reprinted for the " Tudor Translations " 
(1895), with an introduction by George Wyndham. 


NORTH ADAMS, a city of Berkshire county, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A., situated at the junction of the N. and S. branches of the 
Hoosac river, and the Boston & Maine (at the \V. terminus 
of the Hoosac Tunnel) and the Boston & Albany railways, in 
the extreme N.W. part of the state. Pop. (1905) 22,150; (1910) 
22,019. Area, 19-9 sq. m. In the city are the villages of North 
Adams, Greylock and Blackinton. Within the city limits are 
a natural bridge across Hudson Brook, 50-60 ft. high, and ruins of 
Fort Massachusetts, which was captured in 1 746 by French and 
Indians under the command of Pierre Francois de Rigaud, 
Chevalier de Vaudreuil (1704-1772). North Adams is the seat of 
a state Normal School (1897). Among its manufactures are 
cotton (especially print) and woollen goods, and hoots and shoes. 
In 1900 the factory products of the city were valued at 
$10,741,495, and in 1905 at $8,035,705. North Adams secured 
incorporation as an independent township in 1878. Township 
government was abandoned and city government was organized 
in 1895; in 1900 part of Williamstown was annexed. 


NORTHALLERTON, a market town in the Richmond parlia- 
mentary division of the North Riding of Yorkshire, England, 
30 m. N.N.W. from York by the North Eastern railway, on which 
it is an important junction. Pop. of urban district (1901) 
4009. It lies in a plain west of the Cleveland and Hambleton 
Hills, on the Sun Beck, a small tributary of the river Wiske. 
The church of All Saints is a large cruciform structure, Norman, 
Early English and Perpendicular, with a central tower 80 ft. in 
height. There is a grammar-school. Among the charities are 
a hospital founded in 1476 by Richard Moore. There are no 
traces of the fortified palace of the bishops of Durham, of the 
White Friars' monastery founded in 1354, or of the Austin priory 
founded in 1341. The town- has a considerable agricultural 
trade, and there are motor-engineering works. In the neighbour- 
hood of Northallerton is the priory of Mount Grace, a Carthusian 
foundation of 1397. It consists of an outer court entered through 
a gatehouse, the church and chapter-house, with other buildings 
lying on the north side, partly surrounded by monastic dwelling- 
houses. These houses, with gardens attached, also surround three 
sides of the cloister court, which lies north of the outer court. 
In the vicinity are a monks' well and a ruined chapel of the 16th 
century. 

Northallerton (Alvetune, Allerton) is said to have been a 
Roman station and afterwards a Saxon " burgh," hut nothing is 
known with certainty ahout it before the account given in the 
Domesday Survey, which shows that before the Conquest Earl 
Edwin had held the manor, but that the Normans had destroyed 
it so utterly that it was still waste in 1086. Soon after his 
accession William Rufus gave it to the bishop of Durham, whose 
successors continued to hold it until it was taken over by the 
ecclesiastical commissioners in 1865. As a borough by pre- 
scription Northallerton returned two members to the parliament 
of 1298, but was not represented again until 1640, when its ancient 
privileges were restored. The Municipal Reform Act of 1832 
reduced the number of members to one, and in 1885 the town was 
disfranchised. The first account of the borough and its privileges 
is contained in an inquisition taken in 1333 after the death of 
Anthony, bishop of Durham, which shows that the hurgesses 
held the town with the markets and fairs at a fee-farm rent of 40 
marks yearly, and that they had two reeves who sat in court 
with the bishop's bailiff to hear the disputes of the townspeople. 
This form of government continued until 1851, when a local board 
was formed, which in 1894 was superseded hy an urban district 
council. A weekly market on Wednesday was granted by King 
John to the bishop in 1205. A subsequent bishop obtained a 
grant of a fair on St Bartholomew's day, which according to 
Camden (circa 1585), had become almost " the most thronged " 
cattle fair in England, but is no longer held. In 1317 the town 
,was burnt by the Scots under .Robert Bruce, although the hur- 
gesses paid 3000 marks that it might be spared. In consequence 
they were exempted from taxes in 13 19. 

See Victoria County History, Yorkshire; C. J. D. Ingledew, The 
History and Antiquities of Northallerton in the County of York (1858) ; 
J. L. Saywell, The History and Annals of Northallerton (1885). 


NORTH AMERICA. In the article America a brief geographi- 
cal survey is taken of the two continents which bear this name; 
and their points of similarity and contrast are broadly 
indicated. When North America is compared with ^J™*/ 1 * 
the northern continents of the Old World, an important North 
correspondence is found between it and the greater America 
part of Eurasia; but here the corresponding parts are 1"* . 
reversed, right and left, like the two hands. The Lauren- 
tian highlands agree with Scandinavia and Finland, both having 
escaped deformation since very ancient times. A series of water 
bodies (the Great lakes in North America; the southern Baltic, 
with Onega, Ladoga, &c. in Europe) occupy depressions that 
are associated with the boundary between the very ancient lands 
and their less ancient covering strata. The old worn-down and 
re-elevated Appalachian mountains of south-eastern North 
America agree well with the Hercynian mountains of similar 
history in middle Europe (Ardennes, Slate mountains of the 
middle Rhine, &c), each range entering the sea at its Atlantic 
end (in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland; in Brittany, Wales and 
Ireland), and dipping under younger formations at its inland end. 
Certain younger ranges — seldom recognized as mountains 
because they are mostly submerged in the American mediter- 
raneans (Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea), but of great ahsolute 
relief and with crests rising in the larger West Indian islands — 
may be compared with the younger ranges of southern Europe 
(Pyrenees, Alps, Caucasus) hordering the classic Mediterranean 
and the seas farther east. The central plains of North America 
correspond well with the plains of Russia and western Siberia; 
both stretch from great enclosed water bodies on the south to the 
Arctic Ocean, and both are built of undisturbed Palaeozoic strata 
toward the axis of symmetry and of younger strata away from it. 
Finally, the Western highlands of North America may be com- 
pared with the great mountain complex of central and eastern 
Asia. In this remarkahle succession of resemblances, we find 
one of the best proofs of the continental unity of Eurasia. More- 
over, the resemblances thus described controvert the idea, 
prevalent when geology was less advanced than to-day, that the 
New World of civilized discovery is an " old world " geologically, 
and that the Old World of history is geologically " new." Both 
worlds are so old, and both share so well the effects of successive 
geological changes from the most ancient to the most modern 
periods, that neither can regard the other as older or younger than 
itself. 

There are several climatic similarities between North America 
and Eurasia. The Appalachians and the Hercynian mountains 
of middle Europe both contain extensive coal deposits of similar 
geological age, thus indicating a climatic and geographic re- 
semblance at a time of great antiquity. The Laurentian high- 
lands and the Scandinavian highlands were both heavily and 
repeatedly glaciated in recent geological times, and the ice 
sheets that crept out on all sides from those centres spread far 
over the lower lands to the south and away from the axis of 
symmetry towards the continental interior, scouring the high- 
lands and leaving them rocky and barren, strewing extensive 
drift deposits over the peripheral areas, and thus significantly 
modifying their form and drainage; while the much loftier 
mountain ranges of western America and central Asia suffered, 
singularly enough, a far less extensive glaciation. At the present 
time, the plentiful and well-distributed rainfall of the continental 
border on either side of the Atlantic is succeeded by an increasing 
aridity towards the continental interior, until the broad plains 
that rise towards the distant mountain complexes are com- 
paratively barren or even desert. Within each greater mountain 
area extensive interior drainage basins are found holding salt 
lakes, and the recently determined former extension of these 
lakes in Central Asia agrees with the well-proved extension of 
Pleistocene lacustrine conditions in western North America. 

The following sketch of the geological development of North 
America considers the larger physiographic divisions already 
indicated. 

The extensive area of ancient crystalline rocks (Archean), 
stretching from Labrador past Hudson Bay to the Arctic Ocean, 
is of greatly disordered structure, and hence must have once had a 
mountainous form. Moreover, the crystalline texture and deformed 
foliation of the rocks prove that the surface now seen was once buried 
deep beneath the surface of an earlier time, for only at great 
Lauren' depths can such texture and foliation be acquired. Both 
***" these lines of evidence lead to the conclusion that the 
highlands. mcK ierate relief prevalent over theexisting Laurentian region 
is the work of persevering erosion during a long continuance of dry 
land conditions, and hence that the region must be regarded as 
a worn-down mountain system. The worn-down old land is gently 
overlapped, chiefly around the south and west, and south of Hudson 
Bay, by very early Palaeozoic strata which rest upon the eroded 
surface of the crystallines, thus proving that the destruction of the 
ancient mountains had already been accomplished before some of 
the oldest fossiliferous formations of the world had been deposited. 
All the evidence goes to prove that from then to now the Laurentian 
region has been relatively quiescent. In all subsequent time there 
have been here only moderate oscillations of level, one of which 
allowed the transgression of the ancient sea in which the overlapping 
strata were deposited, while another of much more modern date gave 
the region its present highland altitude (1000 to 2000 ft.; mountains 
near the Labrador coast, 8000 ft.), again offering it to the forces of 
erosion. 

It is this ancient Laurentian area that the earlier geologists named 
the " Continental Nucleus," as if it had been the first part of North 
America to rise from the primeval waters of an assumed universal 
ocean. The " Archean V," formed by the two arms of the Lauren- 
tian oldland stretching from Labrador to the Arctic, between 
which Hudson Bay is included, has been repeatedly described as the 
oldest area of the continent, the beginning around which many later 
additions have built the existing outlines; and as such it has been 
adduced in favour of the theory of the permanence of continents. 
But when thus stated, the half of the story in favour of this theory 
is not told. Hudson Bay is not due to a primitive failure of elevation 
between the arms of the " Archean V " ; it is not a deep basin 
whose floor has never emerged from the primeval ocean, but an 
ancient and comparatively shallow depression in a pre-existent land, 
over which the sea flowed as the surface sank below sea-level. South 
and west from the " Archean Nucleus,'* the Cambrian strata of the 
medial plains of North America are found to lie, wherever their base 
is discovered, on a foundation that possesses all the essential features 
of the Laurentian oldland. This relation is found all around the 
Adirondack mountains in New York, along the Appalachians 
southward to Georgia, through the Mississippi basin in Wisconsin 
and Missouri, and beyond in Texas, and farther west inthe Black 
Hills, as well as certain points in the Rocky Mountains region. 
Hence the pre-Cambrian land surface of the continent must have had 
not only a vastly greater area than was formerly attributed to it, 
but also an earlier origin; for at the time when it was thought by 
the older geologists to be first rising from the primeval ocean, it is 
now proved to have been slowly sinking after a prolonged land exist- 
ence. The crystalline Archaean rocks in the Laurentian region and 
its scattered fellows cannot possibly be explained as a primitive sea 
bottom, rising above sea-level to make the beginning of a continent 
and receiving Cambrian strata upon its still submerged borders, 
but only as portions of an already old and deeply-denuded land area, 
which was in pre-Cambrian time much larger than the visible 
Laurentian area of to-day, and which was reduced to perhaps half 
its primeval dimensions by a gradual submergence beneath the trans- 
gressing sea in which the Cambrian sediments were laid down. 
We are thus led to believe that much of the continent of to-day was 
a continent in the earliest geological times, and that the seas which 
partly covered it in Palaeozoic and Mesozoic time were due to 
partial submergence, not to partial emergence. Furthermore, all the 
marine strata that now stretch over a large part of what is believed 
to have been the ancient continental surface are of relatively shallow 
water origin; none of them bears any close resemblance to the 
deposits of the deep oceans that have been so well studied of late 
years. Hence the Palaeozoic and Mesozoic seas of North America 
were not deep oceans, and as far as this continent is concerned it 
is by no means admissible to assume, as some of the earlier geo- 
logists did, that the position of continents and oceans have repeatedly 
changed places. The testimony of the rocks is decidedly in favour 
of Dana's view that continental masses are relatively permanent. 

The early history of the Laurentian region has been dwelt upon 
because of its great importance in the history of the continent, 
and because its history has so generally been misunderstood. To 
these reasons may be added a third: through Palaeozoic and 
Mesozoic time the history of the Laurentian region is for the most 
part a blank. Records are wanting from the early Palaeozoic to 
the Pleistocene, when the Laurentian uplands became the centres 
from which the ice sheets of the Glacial period spread out on all sides. 
As a' result of this late chapter in the history of the region, the 
weathered soils of earlier periods were swept away along with an 
unknown amount of firm rock, leaving bare ledges, scattered boulders 
and gravelly drift to-day upon a rugged upland without mountains 
(except in north-east Labrador), but diversified by innumerable 
knobs and hollows. The drainage of the region has thus been thrown 
into disorder; large and small lakes and marshy hollows abound; 
the streams are repeatedly interrupted by rapids, and frequently 
split into two or more channels, enclosing islands many miles 
in length. They are the only highways of this thinly inhabited 
region. 

The Appalachian province is a generally hilly and mountainous 
belt, stretching from Newfoundland to Alabama. It seems for the 
most part to have belonged in the earliest times to the 
freat pre-Cambrian land area, of which the Laurentian y?*' 
ighland is the more manifest representative; for where- JS/ d 
ever the basal members of the Palaeozoic sedimentary * a/I 
series are found in the Appalachians, they rest upon a floor of 
denuded Archean rocks, and the lowest layers are largely composed 
of Archaean detritus. This province must, however, be set aside 
from the undisturbed Laurentian region because of the repeated 
movements of depression, deformation and elevation that it has 
suffered, generally along a north-east south-west trend, causing the 
successive alternations of heavy deposition, and almost equally heavy 
denudation that have prevailed with varying intensity during the 
whole stretch of geological time covered by the fossiliferous record. 
The earliest important mountain-making disturbances interrupted 
the conditions of deposition in Cambrian time, and produced what 
has been called the Green Mountain system. A later, and probably 
greater, disturbance, with its climax at the close of Carboniferous 
time, established the Appalachian Mountain system; but, as under- 
stood to-day, the " Appalachian revolution " of the older geologists 
should be regarded as a long-lasting process, perhaps intermittently 
enduring as long as the whole of Carboniferous time. A subordinate 
period of deposition and deformation occurred early in Mesozoic 
time, marked by the accumulation and disturbance of several basins 
of the Newark formation, roughly corresponding to the Triassic of 
Europe. 

The Appalachian mountains of to-day were formerly regarded as 
the unconsumed remnants of the chief Appalachian uplift; but it 
is now generally agreed that Mesozoic erosion reduced the greater 
part of the range to a lowland of moderate or small relief, leaving 
only isolated groups of subdued mountains in the areas of the most 
resistant rocks, and that the altitude and form of the mountains 
of to-day are chiefly the result* of the Tertiary elevation and dis- 
section of the previously worn-down mass — the additional height 
thus given in Tertiary time to the pre-existent subdued mountain 
groups making them now the loftiest areas of the range, as in the 
White Mountains of New Hampshire (Mount Washington, 6293 ft.) 
and the Black Mountains of North Carolina a (Mount Mitchell, 6711 
ft.). It is interesting to note that the axis of Tertiary elevation 
is nearly parallel to and closely associated with the axes of the earlier 
disturbances, but it lies somewhat to the north-west of its prede- 
cessors, and therefore involves considerable areas of flat-lying 
Palaeozoic strata on the inner side of the previously disturbed belt 
from New York to Alabama, thus producing what is known as the 
Alleghany plateau (altitudes, 2000 to 4000 ft.). It should be added 
that the Ozark plateau of Missouri and the Ouachita mountains on 
the south, in Arkansas and farther west, are related to one another 
in much the same way as the Alleghany plateau and the middle 
ranges of the Appalachians — the two pairs corresponding to a 
remarkable degree in regard to conditions of ancient accumulation, 
medieval deformation and denudation, and more modern uplift 
and dissection; it is, therefore, admissible to classify this western 
group of uplifts as an annex to the normal Appalachians. Numerous 
and extensive coal seams occur in the wonndown Appalachians of 
Nova Scotia, Pennsylvania and Alabama, as well as in the Alleghany 
plateau from Pennsylvania to Alabama, and in the extension of the 
same strata through the Ohio and middle Mississippi basins. 

The eastern coast of the continent has a rocky and ragged shore 
line from Maine to Greenland, with numerous submerged lowlands 
and valleys forming bays, and as many uplands and ridges out- 
stretching in promontories and islands; this being the result of the 
summation of many movements of the land, whose total gives an 
increasing measure of depression to the north, where an archipelago 
at last replaces what was probably once a corner of the continent; 
but the measure of the depression is uncertain, because of the doubt 
regarding the depth beneath sea-level to which the Pleistocene 
glaciers may have worn the pre-Glacial valleys. South of New 
England, along the Atlantic coast, and around the border of the gulf 
into Mexico, the dominating movement of the land in late geological 
periods has been upward with respect to sea-level, whereby a former 
sea bottom, on which the land waste of Cretaceous and Tertiary 
times had been outspread, was revealed as a coastal plain, across 
which the rivers of the former land area now extend their courses, 
from the old shore line to the new. Part of the same plain, still sub- 
merged, forms the " continental shelf " of the mid-Atlantic border. 
Florida seems to be a projecting swell of this shelf, around whose 
extremity coral reefs have been added, but whose greater mass is still 
under a shallow sea cover. Along the ragged coast in the north a 
moderate and very modern movement of elevation has laid bare 
clay-floored lowlands that were lately beneath the sea, as in the plain 
of the lower St Lawrence valley, while along the coastal plain of the 
south a slight movement of depression has drowned a number of low 
valley floors, producing shallow arms of the sea, as Chesapeake Bay, 
Albemarle and Pamlico Sound and Mobile Bay. All the coast south 
of New York is low, and a great part of it is fringed with wave-built 
sand-reefs. 

The great complex of mountains in the Western highlands,
sometimes styled the Cordilleras of North America (the Rocky 
Mountains being the eastern members of the system .in the 
- United States and Canada), differ from the Laurentian 

	Jim ^ t

and Appalachian regions in having suffered numerous 
duieras of disorderly movements at dates so recent that the existing 
mrth relief of the region bears a significant relation to its irregular 

	America.

up U(ts; a relation that doubtless once obtained in the older 
mountain areas of the east, where it has now been obliterated by 
erosion. It is not, however, only in modern geological periods that 
mountain-making disturbances have prevailed in the regions of the 
Western highlands; their geological history is one of repeated and 
long-continued movement — the ruins of the more ancient upheavals 
supplying materials for the strata of newer ranges. For example, in 
Canada an axial belt of ancient rocks is bordered on the east and 
west by stratified formations of enormous thickness (40,000 to 60,000 
ft.), those on the west including a large share of contemporaneous 
volcanic materials; all three beta having been deformed and up- 
heaved, as well as deeply dissected in the later chapters of geological 
time. It is, however, important to note that the interval between 
Palaeozoic and Mcsozoic time, in which mountain-making disturb- 
ances were so general in western Europe and eastern North America 
that the older geologists thought them to be of world-wide extent, 
was here generally passed over in relative quiet, so that continuous 
sedimentation produced in certain districts a conformable series 
of deposits from Silurian to Cretaceous time. Furthermore, the 
Carboniferous period, which gained its name from the extensive coal 
deposits that were then formed in western Europe and eastern North 
America, was a marine limestone-making period in the Cordilleran 
region. 

There is here exemplified, as might be expected in a region extend- 
ing over 3000 m. from Alaska to southern Mexico, and measuring 
over 1000 m. in breadth at its middle, a great variety of plateau 
and mountain structures. # The broad upheaval of adjacent blocks 
of earth-crust without significant tilting or disturbance has produced 
the plateaus of Arizona and Utah. Some of the simplest and 
youngest mountain ridges in the world are to be found in the broken 
and tilted lava blocks of southern Oregon. Tilted blocks on a larger 
scale, much more affected by processes of sculpture, are found in the 
lofty St Elias Alps of Alaska, the site of some of the greatest glaciers 
in the world. The wall of a huge fracture, now elaborately carved, 
constitutes the western slope of the Wahsatch range, facing the desert 
basin of Utah. Ranges of a relatively simple arch structure are seen 
in the Uinta mountains of Wyoming and Utah. Arched upheavals 
also characterize the front range of the Rocky Mountains proper in 
Colorado and Wyoming and in the Black Hills of South Dakota, 
bending up the strata of the adjacent plains in the simplest fashion, 
and producing dome-like mountains, now deeply dissected by out- 
flowing consequent streams. A remarkable change in the structure 
of the Rocky Mountains occurs north of the Missouri river in Montana 
and northward into Canada, where the front range is of synclinal or 
trough structure, with the youngest instead of the oldest rocks along 
the axis, while the strata of the plains are bent down and over- 
ridden in the most abnormal manner. Indeed, mountain structure 
occurs of so great diversity in various parts 1 of the Cordilleran region 
as to elude general description. The disturbances extend directly 
to the western coast line, including not only the coast range of Cali- 
fornia, but the peninsular area of Lower California (belonging to 
Mexico) and the detached mountainous islands of British Columbia 
and Alaska. 

Volcanoes of commanding form here and there dominate the 
plateaus and mountains. Orizaba, Popocatepetl and their neigh- 
bours, terminating the Cordilleran system in Mexico; Mount San 
Francisco, bearing snow and Arctic plants above the nearly desert 
plateau of Arizona; Mount Shasta, with small glaciers in northern 
California: Mount Rainier, with extensive glaciers surmounting the 
Cascade range of Washington; Mount Wrangell in Alaska, and 
farther on the many cones in the curved chain of the Aleutian 
islands: all these have been heaped up around vents through which 
their lavas rose from some deep source. Vast lava floods have been 
poured out at different times. The southern part of the Mexican 
plateau is built up^ in large measure of lava sheets, capped with 
volcanoes. Extensive lava beds, barren and rugged, cover large 
areas in north-eastern California. The basins of Snake and Columbia 
rivers in Idaho and Washington are flooded with older and more 
extensive lava sheets, whose borders lap around promontories and 
islands of the '* mainland." Still older lava-flows in British Columbia 
are now deeply dissected by the branches of Frazer river, and remain 
only in disconnected upland areas. High plateaus in Utah are pro- 
tected by a heavy lava capping, the result of great eruptions before 
the plateaus were uplifted. Here and there rise dome-like mountains, 
the result of the underground intrusion of lavas in cistern-like spaces, 
forming " laccoliths/' and blistering up the overlying strata. Thus, 
by mountain upheaval or volcanic eruption, great altitudes have 
'been gained. Where the uplift has been strong, ranges of truly 
Alpine form with extensive snow-fields and glaciers occur, as in the 
Selkirk range of Canada (now traversed by the Canadian Pacific 
railway), and again in Alaska. Heights of 12,000 and 14,000 ft. are 
exceeded by numerous summits in the central part of the system ; 
but the dominating peaks are found far in the north-west and in 
the south. Several mountains in Alaska exceed 18,000 ft. (Mount 
McKinley, 20,300 ft.; Mount Logan, 19,540 ft.; Mount St Elias, 
18,000 ft.); and the great Mexican volcanoes rise nearly as high 
(Orizaba, 18,250 ft.). Widespread plateaus maintain upland altitudes 
of more than a mile over vast areas. 

• As in all regions of great altitude, the erosion of valleys has 
progressed on a magnificent scale in the Cordilleran region, and the 
actual form of many of its parts is more the result of sculpturing 
than of uplifting. The plateaus of Arizona are traversed by the deep 
canons of the Colorado river and its branches, at places 1 m. deep, 
and with elaborately carved walls. Upon the plateaus themselves, 
long^ and ragged cliffs of recession attest an even greater work of 
erosion, than the canons. In all the mountain ranges except those 
of youngest uplift, valleys have been actively eroded, sometimes 
producing steep peaks as in Mount Assiniboine (11,500 ft.) in the 
Canadian Rockies, rivalling the Swiss Matterhorn in sharpness of 
form; but the greater number of summits have been worn to roughly 
pyramidal form between wide-flaring valleys, and the mountain 
flanks have thus come to be extensively covered wit Si rock waste 
lying on slopes of relatively uniform declivity. Some of the ranges 
are in a second cycle of dissection, having been once worn down to 
moderate relief and now being elevated for renewed erosion ; the 
Sierra Nevada of California is believed to be, in part, of this history, 
having at least in its central and northern parts been well reduced 
and now again enjoying a mountainous character in virtue of a later 
slanting uplift en bloc, with rapid descent on its eastern fractured 
face. Other ranges, almost completely worn down, still remain 
low, as in south-eastern California, where they are now represented 
by gently sloping rock floors veneered with gravel and retaining only 
small remnants of their original mass still unconsumed; thus the 
end, as well as the beginning, of the cycle of erosion, together with 
many complications of its progress, are illustrated in different parts 
of this great and varied mountain system. In the fjorded coast of 
Alaska, as well as in the higher northern ranges, signs of intense 
glacial erosion are seen in the cirques at the valley heads and in the 
discordant junction of the "hanging" lateral valleys and the deep 
trunk valleys — the floors of the former being cut off on the walls 
of the latter. 

Fitting complements of the deeply-eroded mountains are found in 
the great accumulations of mountain waste now occupying basins 
of depression between the various ranges, as in Mexico, Utah, 
Nevada, Montana and elsewhere. Erosion and transportation here 
combine to build up the floors of the basins with the waste of the 
surrounding highlands; a result that is peculiarly beneficial in 
Mexico where the climate of the plateau basins is rendered relatively 
temperate by reason of its altitude, and where the surface is easily 
habitable by reason of its small relief. In the larger depressions, as 
along the boundary of the United States and Mexico, isolated ranges 
frequently rise like islands over the plain of waste that has been 
built up on their flanks. Shallow saline lakes or playas (wet- weather 
lakes) without outlets lie on the lowest parts of the waste-filled 
basins ; their failure to overflow in rivers discharging to the sea 
being less the result of enclosure by barriers than of deficiency of 
rainfall ; for it is chiefly in the arid region that the waste-floored 
basins are best developed. Indeed, the rainfall is often so scanty 
that the streams from the mountains — where most of the little 
precipitation occurs — often fail even to form lakes, withering away 
on the waste plains. In all these cases, the wash of rock waste from 
the mountains remains on the continent and builds up the basin 
plains, instead of being carried away from the land to form stratified 
sediments on the sea floor. The habit of gathering mountain waste 
in interior basins that characterizes so much of the Cordilleran 
region to-day is only the continuation of an earlier practice, ' for 
extensive basin deposits of Tertiary date are found in many parts 
of the Cordilleran region; some of them arc famous for preserving 
vertebrate fossils, such as those of the many-toed ancestors of the 
horse. 

Between the loftier western highlands and the lower eastern 
highlands (Laurentian and Appalachian) lies a great extension of 
medial plains, stretching in moderate altitude from the __ ., „ . 
Arctic Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico, and having in their J! M et "*' 
middle a breadth of 1500 m. They are composed ™ /17S * 
throughout of nearly horizontal strata and mark a region long 
exempt from strong disturbance. Although for the most part floored 
by marine formations, their structure and composition indicate, as 
has already been said, relatively shallow water. The ancient sea 
that once occupied the middle belt of the continent therefore had 
little likeness to the abysmal oceans, but resembled rather the shallow 
ocean margins that to-day overlap various continental masses — 
the largest example of this kind now existing being between Asia and 
Australia. The eastern part of the plains is underlaid by Palaeozoic 
strata, already mentioned as having been laid down upon the sub- 
siding Archaean continent or folded in the making of the Appal- 
achians; coal beds are here included in the Ohio and middle Missis- 
sippi basins. The area of the western plains remained submerged 
to a later date, preserving a stretch of marine waters to the end of 
Mesozoic time, and thus resembling the lowland belt of western 
Asia, which was similarly covered by t a broad and a shallow arm 
of the ocean extending from the Arctic to the European mediter- 
raneans until a late geological date. The surface of the medial plains 
is not always so even as might be inferred from their name. Both 

	V^Wj 

	Central America and the West ladies* 

the eastern and the western areas have been extensively denuded, 
even to the point of being reduced to peneplains. Their present 
altitude is not so much the result of their original uplift from the 
sea as of a later elevatory movement. The great river basins, for 
which North America is famous, have thus been formed between 
the eastern and western highlands — the Mississippi receiving 
the drainage of a vast area (about 1,240,000 sq. m.) ior discharge 
to the south, while the Saskatchewan and Mackenzie gather their 
waters from somewhat less extensive areas in the north. Pleistocene 
glaciation covered the plains of the Ohio, upper Mississippi and 
Winnipeg districts with extensive deposits of ice-laid or water-laid 
drift, furnishing a generally smooth surface and a fertile soil: here 
are the true prairies — treeless, but richly grassed. 

The traditional continuity of the Cordilleras of North and South 
America has been broken by investigations in the isthmian portion 
of the northern^ continent. The structural peculiarities 
of the western highlands of North America may be traced 
only to the east and west belt of great volcanoes by 
which the plateau of central Mexico is terminated on the 
south. The ranges of the Andes fail to reach Panama, 
from which the nearest one is separated by the valley of 
the Atrato. The two Cordilleras are out of line with each other, 
and their ends are some 1200 m. apart. Central America, the West 
Indies and various submarine ridges by which the islands are con- 
nected with one another and with the mainland to the west, as 
well as certain ranges along the northern margin of South America, 
all belong together in what has been termed the Antillean mountain 
system, in which east and west trends of late geological date pre- 
dominate, with abundant volcanic additions on the Pacific border 
of Central America, and along the eastern end of the system in the 
Windward islands of the Lesser Antilles. The unity of this system 
has been until recently overlooked partly because the Antillean 
ranges are for the most part still under water, and yet further because 
the volcanoes which form the strongest reliefs of the isthmian region 
are so arranged along the Pacific coast as to suggest the continuity 
of the Cordilleran systems on the north and south; but these 
volcanoes are really only superadded to a foundation of quite another 
kind. Geological studies on the mainland and on the islands have 
shown that both fundamental structure and surface form are not 
Cordilleran ; and numerous soundings in the adjacent mediterraneans 
suggest that the islands are best interpreted "as the somewhat 
denuded crests of great crustal ridges. The warm waters that bathe 
the West Indies come with a high temperature from the equatorial 
Atlantic, and favour the growth of corals along the shores. Fringing 
and elevated reefs are known on many of the islands. The Bahamas 
are the slightly overtopping parts of a broad platform of coral and 
other calcareous marine deposits, of which the greater area constitutes 
extensive shallow banks, which descend by a steep slope on the 
north-east to great depths in the Atlantic. The lowlands of Yucatan 
resemble Florida in being the emerged part of a much larger mass, 
of which an equal portion is still under water in the shelf around the 
Gulf of Mexico. All this region is luxuriantly productive and is 
advantageously surrounded by waters which would be barren and 
desert, like the Sahara, if replaced by lowlands. The active volcanoes 
on the Pacific slope have built many cones and uplands, some of 
their historic eruptions having been of terrible violence. Thus Lake 
Nicaragua, once a bay of the Pacific, has been cut off by volcanic 
deposits, leaving only the Gulf of Fonseca open to the western ocean, 
raising the level of the lake behind the barrier and turning its dis- 
charge eastward to the Caribbean Sea across what was once the 
inter-oceanic watershed. 

The successive crustal movements by which the land area of what 
we now know as North America has been increased and connected 
Rl ers have determined the growth of several great river systems 
through which the broader part of the continent is drained. 
The movements that resulted in the emergence of the Plains had the 
effect of engrafting many ancient rivers of moderate size upon trunks 
of unusual dimensions. The Mississippi system, some of whose 
eastern branches probably date from early Mesozoic time, received 
great reinforcements by the addition of many long western branches 
in Tertiary time, roughly contemporaneous with the uplift of the 
Gulf coastal plain by which the lower trunk of the river was extended 
to the sea. The present headwaters of that river-trunk to which the 
name of Mississippi is applied, and which for that reason have gained 
an undue subjective importance, are of relatively modern date, as 
they are controlled by the abundant glacial deposits of northern 
Minnesota. The evolution of the Mackenzie resembles that of the 
Mississippi in a very general way, although some of its eastern 
branches may be the descendants of ancestors more ancient than 
those flowing westward from the Appalachians; but # the regime of 
the great northern river is strikingly unlike that of its still greater 
southern analogue on account of its course being from a warmer to 
a colder climate: hence ice-dams, obstructed discharge, and over- 
flows recur every spring. The Nelson and the St Lawrence systems, 
draining eastward to Hudson Bay and St Lawrence Gulf, receive 
drainage from areas that would belong to the Mackenzie and the 
Mississippi systems under a simpler plan of continental growth; 
and there is much reason for thinking that this simpler plan obtained 
until the occurrence of those changes, in association with the Glacial 
period, whereby sea waters gained access to the depressions that now 
hold the bays and sounds of the north-eastern coast. In exemplifica- 
tion of the rule that the larger ocean receives the drainage of the 
smaller continental area, the rivers that flow into the Pacific rank 
below those belonging to the Atlantic. The greatest is the Yukon, 
of farther Canada and inner Alaska, one of the great rivers of the 
world, little known until the active exploration of its basin for gold- 
fields. The Frazer drains much of the mountainous area of southern 
British Columbia, as the Columbia drains that of the north-western 
United States; the latter is peculiar in that one of its headwaters 
rises at the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains in northern Montana 
and flows westward through the ranges. The Colorado discharges 
a muddy current into the Gulf of California; but for the aridity of 
its large drainage area its volume w<*uld be much larger. The same 
is true of the Rio Grande, whose name would be better justified if so 
much of its basin were not semi-arid. 

The most remarkable lacustrine region of the continent, rivalling 
that of Central Africa, forms a belt around the border of the Lauren- 
tian highland; here, in addition to ten large lakes, there Lakes* 
are hundreds of medium size, and many thousand small 
lakes. They are peculiar in occupying a region of moderate relief, 
in which no strong dislocations have taken place in recent geological 
time (unless in the case of Lake Superior), and thus in contrasting 
with the great African lakes which occupy rift-valleys or graben of 
comparatively recent fracture. The Lauren tian lakes are further 
characterized by an intimate association with the ice-sheets of the 
Glacial period; but while glacial erosion and drift obstruction 
suffice to account for the smaller lakes, it is very probable that broad 
crustal warping and drainage reversal have been potent aids to the 
other processes in producing the great lakes. The northern Cordil- 
leran region contains many beautiful lakes of moderate size in deep 
valleys among the crowded ranges of the narrowed mountain belt. 
Their origin has not been closely studied. The basins among the 
spaced ranges of the middle and southern Cordilleras, in the United 
States and Mexico, contain many lakes that occupy shallow depres- 
sions in desert plains; they are usually without outlet and saline; 
many of the basins were formerly occupied by lakes of much greater 
size, some of which overflowed, implying a climate moister than 
that of to-day, probably correlated with the glacial climate of the 
regions farther north. Lakes in volcanic craters or behind volcanic 
barriers occur in Central America, while Florida possesses many 
small lakes in limestone basins. The following table is taken from 
Russell's Lakes of North America'. — 

	Lake. 
	Ontario 
	Erie 
	Huron . 
	Michigan 
	Superior 
	Altitude. 
	Area. 
	Depth 
	Ft. 
	Sq. m. 
	Ft. 
	247 
	7,200 (?) 
	738 
	573 
	9,900 
	210 
	582 
	22,322 
	750 
	582 
	21,729 
	870 
	602 
	31,000 
	1008 

The climatic features of North America are best appreciated 
when considered as exhibiting modifications of those general climatic 
conditions which prevail in consequence of the globular climate 
form of the earth as a whole. In January, when the iso- 
therms of 65 to 75 F. stretch almost directly across land and sea in 
the north torrid zone, a mean temperature of zero or less invades the 
region north-west of Hudson Bay, which thus resembles north-eastern 
Asia in departing greatly from the mean prevailing in similar latitudes 
on the northern oceans, and in bringing upon the northern lands an 
extension of frigid conditions that have no analogue in the southern or 
oceanic hemisphere. In July, when the isotherms of 40 and 50 
have a tolerably direct course around the latitude circles that border 
the continent on the north, a great middle area of North America 
becomes warmer than the seas on the east and west, having a mean 
of over 80 °, and in part over90°. In January the Hudson Bay region 
is 30 colder than the mean of its own latitude, about 6o° colder than 
the mean of the corresponding southern latitude; while in July the 
Arizona-Mexican region is 20 above the mean of its own latitude, 
or about 40 above the mean of the corresponding southern latitude. 
In both winter and summer the isotherms are more closely crowded 
while crossing the continent than while crossing the adjacent oceans; 
or, in other words, the poleward temperature gradient is stronger 
on the land than on the oceans; and all these features should be 
regarded as inherent characteristics of the climate of North America 
in virtue of its being a continent chiefly in temperate latitudes. 

An associated feature of continental climate is found in the strong 
annual range of temperature of the central land area. The range 
between the means of January and Julv exceeds 40* for the largest 
part of the lands, and 70 for much of the northern lands; the range 
of extreme temperatures is much greater. On corresponding oceanic 
areas in the northern hemisphere the range is little more than 20°, 
and in the southern hemisphere it is probably less than io°. It 
must appear from this that if the largest part of North America is 
said to be in the north temperate zone, " temperate " must be taken 
as having little of the meaning originally given to it in southern 
Europe, for the winter cold is severe andthe summer heat is excessive 
over much of the North American continent. 

The several members of the terrestrial wind system, including 
therein the trade winds of a broadened torrid zone, the stormy 
westerly winds of middle latitudes and the irregular winds of the 
polar regions, are well exemplified over North America; but, as is 
usually the case on land, the systematic movement of the atmosphere 
is better seen in the drift of the clouds than in the movement of the 
surface winds, which are much modified by the changes from hill to 
valley, from mountain to plain. Nevertheless the prevalence of the 
general atmosphere currents has much to do with the control of 
certain values of annual temperature range, as well as with the 
distribution of rainfall. ^ The former are small (about 20 ) along a 
great stretch of the Pacific coast, even as far north as Alaska, where 
the moderating influences of the ocean are brought upon the land 
by the westerly winds; while arrange appropriate to a continental 
interior (30 ° or 40 ) is experienced over most of the eastern side of 
the continent in temperate latitudes, and even upon the North 
Atlantic ocean near the American coast, where strong seasonal 
changes of temperature are carried forward by the westerly winds. 
It is particularly in this respect that the general climatic resemblances 
between North America and Eurasia, above referred to, are broken; 
for eastern Canada and western Europe are strikingly unlike in 
seasonal variations of temperature. Labrador is about io° cooler 
than northern Germany in July, but nearly 40 colder in January. 

The distribution of rainfall is in general controlled by the prevailing 
course of the winds. The West Indies receive abundant rain from 
the passing trades. In Mexico and Central America the eastern slopes 
are tor the most part better watered than the western, because the 
winds there come chiefly from the east (maximum over 100 in. in 
Guatemala and adjacent parts) . Farther north the reverse holds true ; 
the Pacific slope north of 40 ° latitude has an abundant rainfall (maxi- 
mum over 100 in.), and its mountains are clothed with dense forests. 
There are large areas of deficient rainfall(less than 20 in.) in the interior 
of the continent, where the intermontane basins andthe piedmont 
plains that slope eastward from the Rocky Mountains in middle lati- 
tudes are treeless. The areas afflicted with dryness are unsymmetri- 
cally distributed, being west of the medial meridian (95 ), because of 
the ranges near the Pacific by which rain is withheld from the basins 
and from the plains farther east. The dryness is induced not only 
by light precipitation, but also by active evaporation in the warm 
season — a rule that holds true until a high latitude is reached. 
East of the medial meridian great profit is received from the warm 
and moist winds that are drawn inland from the water surface of the 
mediterraneans (Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea) which so advan- 
tageously occupy the latitudes thatare given up to the Sahara in 
the Old World. It is largely on this account that the central and 
eastern parts of the Mississippi basin enjoy a. sufficient and well- 
distributed rainfall, producing forests or fertile prairies over great 
areas (rainfall over 40 in.). Regions of prevailing^ snowfall are chiefly 
in the north-west and north-east; the former includes the higher 
ranges of the western highlands in Canada and Alaska, where the 
snowfall from the Pacific winds is heavy, and extensive snowfields 
and glaciers are formed; the former includes Greenland, where a 
heavy ice-sheet shrouds the land, the snowfall of moderate measure 
being probably supplied mostly from the North Atlantic. In the 
northern continental interior snow covers the ground during the 
winter season, not that the snowfall is heavy but that the persistent 
cold weather preserves the moderate amount that falls. 

The extension of the continent across the belts of the terrestrial 
wind system tends to turn branch winds from the westerlies toward 
the trades on the Pacific border, and from the trades toward the 
westerlies on the Atlantic border. This effect is strengthened in 
summer, when the higher temperature prevalent over the continent 
causes the air to flow away from above the lands, and to accumulate 
over the neighbouring oceans, on each of which a vast anticyclone 
is thereby established — the circulation of the atmosphere, over the 
North Atlantic and North Pacific thus coming to simulate the circu- 
lation of the surface waters of the oceans themselves. It is partly 
on account of this deflection of the summer winds up the Mississippi 
valley that the eastern interior of the continent receives a beneficent 
rainfall as already stated. In winter when the inflow from the south 
is replaced by an outflow, little rain or snow would fall but for the 
indraft winds of cyclonic storms by which the outflow appropriate 
to the cold season of the continent is temporarily reversed. The 
free play of the cyclonic winds north and south over the great medial 
plains permits indrafts from torrid and frigid sources, which some- 
times succeed each other rapidly, producing abrupt and frequent 
weather changes. Something of the same contrasts is produced by 
winds drawn in upon the eastern coast alternately from over the moist 
and warm waters of the Gulf Stream, and from over the moist and 
cold waters of the Labrador current. 

The southerly flow of the branching winds along the Pacific coast 
gives them a drying quality, and thus still further broadens the 
western arid region towards the ocean until it reaches the coast in 
southern California and north-western Mexico (rainfall less than 10 
, in.), there joining the arid belt of western Mexico and presenting a 
strong contrast to the rainy forested coast farther north; but 
although unfavourably dry, the southern California coast is one of 
the most truly temperate regions of the world, in respect of mildness 
and constancy of temperature. The drying winds cover all California 
in summer, but they migrate southward in the winter, giving place 
to the stormy westerlies. Thus California has a subtropical climate 
of wet winters and dry summers; while north in British Columbia 
and Alaska there is plentiful rainfall all the year round, and farther 
south there is persistent aridity. - 

The fauna of North America (Nearctic) is more closely related to 
that of Europe-Asia (Palaearctic) than to that of any other zoo- 
geographical province; the two being united by many 
writers in one faunal province (Holarctic). The reindeer ***mm. 
(caribou), beaver and polar bear are common to both provinces. 
The moose, wapiti, bison and grizzly bear of North America are 
closely related to the elk, red deer or stag, aurochs and brown 
bear of Eurasia; and the following groups are well represented in 
both provinces: cats, lynxes, weasels, bears, wolves, foxes, seals, 
hares, squirrels, marmots, lemming, sheep and deer. On the other 
hand the following forms are characteristic of North America: 
(rodents) pouched rats or gophers, musk rat, prairie dog, Canadian 
porcupine; (carnivora) raccoon and skunk; {ungulates) musk ox, 
bighorn, Rocky Mountains gbat, pronghorn; (marsupial) opossum. 
Among birds there is a close resemblance to those of Eurasia, with 
some admixture of South American forms, as in the humming birds. 
The forms especially characteristic of the northern continent are the 
Baltimore oriole, bobolink, cowbird, flycatchers, wood-warblers, 
Calif or nian quail, tree grouse, sage grouse, wild turkey and turkey 
buzzard. The house sparrow of Europe has been introduced, and 
has become very common, especially in the cities, where it is known 
as the English sparrow. Reptilian and amphibian groups are well 
represented; turtles are especially numerous; salamanders are 
varied and large ; rattlesnakes are among the more peculiar forms. 
Among fish, the characteristic forms are the cyprinoids (carp), 
sturgeon, salmon, pike and especially the suckers, sunfish, mudfish 
(Anita) and gar pike (Lepidosteus). The most characteristic group of 
invertebrates is the Unionidae or river mussels. 

. The floral areas of ^ North America, limited by the geographic 
divisions of the continent, may be divided into five belts: the 
eastern forested area, the western forested area, the p . 
interior unforested area, the northern barren lands and 
the Gulf coast. The eastern forested area extends from the Lauren- 
tian highland in Canada to the Great Lakes, and southward east of 
the Mississippi to the Gulf coast. In the north and along the moun- 
tains southward, the forests are largely coniferous, with a mixture 
of birches, poplars and maples. Southward, especially in the interior 
and at low altitudes, the conifers largely disappear, and oaks, 
hickories, plane-trees, tulir>-trees, walnuts and other ^ valuable 
deciduous species abound. The western forested area begins in the 
eastern Rocky Mountains and extends to the Pacific. Eastwardin 
the mountains the forests are interspersed with arid districts which 
increase in area southward. Northward, in Canada, the mountains 
of the middle Cordilleras are densely wooded with continuous forest 
up to the timber line. Near the middle Pacific coast the forests 
attain a luxuriant development, the redwood (Sequoia) of California 
and Oregon sometimes reaching a height of from 300 to 400 ft. The 
unforested area of the interior consists of two very dissimilar por- 
tions. The vast fertile prairies extend from the Great Lakes west- 
ward to the Great Plains, and southward west of the Mississippi, 
with occasional eastward lobes at low^ altitudes. On these plains 
grasses and other herbaceous vegetation abound, and throughout 
this fertile belt agriculture is largely followed, the grain and hay 
crops being especially important. Northward in Canada the plains 
become wooded, the western mountains and the eastern highlands 
being thus connected by a narrow strip of forest. South-westward 
and westward the fertile prairie gives way to a vast arid region 
beginning on the Great Plains and extending as far as south-eastern 
California, and thence southward into Mexico. On this broad desert 
few trees are found, although pinons grow on the cliffs and ledges, 
and cottonwoods occur along the watercourses; but the various 
ranges that surmount the desert frequently carry forests. The desert 
vegetation as a whole consists of cacti, agaves, sage-brush (Artemisia) 
and other plants adapted to arid conditions. North of the eastern 
forested area and east of the northern Cordilleras are the " barren, 
lands,'* with frozen subsoil, extending to the Arctic coast. The 
growing season here is short and the climate forbidding, so that trees 
cannot develop, although birches, poplars, willows and other genera, 
which southward attain large size, are present as dwarf shrubs. 
The vegetation of this northern barren district, like that of bleak 
mountain summits southward, is very similar in character to that of 
other extreme boreal regions. Blueberries, crowberries and some 
other small fruits are abundant, but the brief summer will not mature 
most crops of the temperate zone. The Gulf coast, on the other hand, 
supports a vegetation decidedly tropical in its nature. Somewhat 
developed in Florida and the other southern states, this flora becomes 
the prevailing one on the coast of Mexico and Central America, 
especially from the region of Vera Cruz southward, where the forests 
are largely composed of palms and live oaks, and where giant 
bamboos often attain a height of 40 ft. In these tropical forests 
many orchids and other showy plants of northern conservatories are 
native. 

North America, with an area of about 8,000,000 sq. m. (16% 
of all the lands, or 4-12% of the whole earth's surface), and a 
mean altitude of about 2000 ft., at present plays a part in 
human history that is of greater importance than is warranted 

	the Continent. 

by its size alone, although it has not in this respect the 
extraordinary importance of Europe. The continent has the 
Economic good fortune t0 ue chiefly in a temperate rather 
Develop' tnan a torrid zone, and in temperate latitudes to be 
ment of much nearer to Europe than to Asia. Whatever may 
have been the first home of the aboriginal inhabitants, 
the dominating people of to-day are derived from the 
leading countries of the Old World. Not only so; temperate 
North America has become the most progressive part of the 
continent because of receiving its new population chiefly from the 
most advanced nations of middle western Europe — Great Britain, 
France and Germany; while the torrid islands and the narrowing 
southern mainland of North America have been settled chiefly 
from the less energetic peoples of southern Europe; and the 
inhospitable northern lands are hardly entered at all by new- 
comers, except in the recently discovered goldfields of the 
far north-west. From the plantation of colonies on the eastern 
coast, the movement inland has been governed to a remarkable 
degree by physiographic factors, such as form, climate and 
products. The cities of the Atlantic harbours and of the adjacent 
lowlands still take a leading part in industry and commerce, 
because of their longer establishment and of their relation to 
Europe. The uplands, ridges and mountains of the Appalachian 
system — the " Backwoods " of a century ago — remain rather 
thinly occupied except at certain centres where coal or other 
earth-product attracts an industrial population. Beyond the 
Appalachians the middle interior contains a very large proportion 
of habitable land. It was long ago recognized as a land of great 
promise, and it is to-day a land of great performance, covered 
with a network of railways, yielding an enormous product of grain, 
and developing industries of all kinds. Indeed, within and closely 
around an area marked by the St Lawrence system on the north, 
the Ohio on the south, and stretching from the Atlantic coast 
between the Gulf of St Lawrence and Chesapeake Bay inland to 
the middle prairies, there is a remarkable concentration of the 
population, industry, progress, wealth and power of North 
America — the focus of attention from all other parts of the 
continent. The regions of the far north and north-east, including 
the greater part of the Laurentian highland and the extreme 
northern stretch of the medial plains and the western highlands, 
remain and will long remain thinly populated. The furs of wild 
animals are their characteristic product. Timber is taken from 
their more accessible forests; but only in mining districts does 
the population notably increase, as in the iron region around 
Lake Superior and in the Klondike gold region. 

In the south-eastern United States lies a belt of coastal 
lowlands skirting the Appalachians, still affected by negro slavery 
and its consequences. The descendants of the early French 
settlers of Canada stand in political rights as well as in loyalty 
to the Government on an equal footing with the British citizens 
of the Dominion. The Italians of the cities, the Hungarians 
of the mines, the Scandinavians of the northern prairies, the 
Irish and Germans everywhere are " Americanized " in the second 
or third generation, rapidly entering local and national politics, 
and hardly less rapidly attaining an honourable social standing 
as tested by intermarriage with English and other stocks. But 
the negro is set aside, even though he has adopted the language 
and the religion of his former masters: political and social 
rights are denied him, and intermarriage with whites is practically 
excluded, although illegitimate mulattos are numerous. Thus 
has slavery left upon a people, amongst whom political rights 
and social opportunities should be equal for all, the heavy burden 
that always retards progress where strongly contrasted races 
are brought together. Farther south still are the tropical 
islands and the narrowing mainland, rich in possible productive- 
ness, but slowly developed because of a prevailing diversity and 
instability of government and lack of progressive spirit among 
the people. Here also there is a considerable proportion of 
negroes, but they live under less unhappy conditions than those 
now obtaining in the United States. In Mexico and Central 
America, the proportionate number of aborigines is much greater 
than farther north. 

West of the Mississippi in middle latitudes the population 
rapidly decreases in density, and over a large extent of the semi- 
arid plains it must long remain sparse. The settlements bordering 
the plains on the east for a long time marked the " Frontier " 
of civilization, for the vast stretch of dry country was a serious 
barrier to farther advance. But the plains are now crossed by 
many railways leading to the Cordilleran region — the " Far 
West " — in large part too rugged or too arid for occupation, 
but rich in minerals from one end to the other, the seat of many 
mining camps of unstable population, and containing numerous 
permanent settlements in the intermontane basins. Great 
irrigation enterprises, conducted under the National Reclamation 
Service of the United States, are employing all available water 
supplies for agriculture; but large areas must remain permanently 
desert. On nearing the farther ocean the climatic conditions 
improve, and the population is rapidly increasing in number and 
wealth; this district not being content to take its name with 
respect to the east, not considering itself as included in the 
" Far West," but choosing the distinctive designation of the 
" Pacific Slope," and, while maintaining an active intercourse 
all across the breadth of the continent, already opening relations 
with the distant Orient by a new approach. Among the earliest 
results of the latter movement was the arrival of Chinese labourers, 
a humble, industrious and orderly class of men, but one which 
stands apart in language, religion and race from the dominant 
population, lives largely without domestic ties, and gains neither 
political nor social standing in the New World. 

Two centuries ago the aboriginal population of North America 
would have deserved description before the immigrant population. 
To-day the aborigines are displaced from nearly all the valuable 
parts of the continent. Never very numerous, they are now decreas- 
ing; many tribes are already extinct, many more are almost so. 
Those which remain less diminished are in the Far North or North- 
West where nature is rigorous; or in the tropical forests of Central 
America where nature is over bounteous; or in the more desert 
parts of the Middle West where nature is arid. The replacement 
of the native races by the foreign has too often been harsh, cruel 
and unjust ; yet it has resulted in an advance of civilization. Many 
savage tribes, speaking many different languages, holding little 
intercourse with each other, and frequently engaged in intertribal 
wars, have given place in little more than two centuries to a great 
population of European origin, whose dominant parts speak one 
language, whose arts are highly advanced, whose home intercourse 
is most active, and whose foreign commerce had attained unexpected 
proportions at the opening of the 20th century. (W. M. D.) 

NORTHAMPTON, EARLS AND MARQUESSES OF. The 

Northampton title has been held in various English families. 
About 1080 Simon de Senlis (d. 1109), a Norman noble, and the 
builder of Northampton Castle, was created earl of Northampton 
as well as earl of Huntingdon by William the Conqueror; his 
son Simon (d. 1153) was also recognized in the title about 1141, 
though his stepfather, David, king of Scotland (1084-1153), 
had meanwhile obtained the earldom in right of his wife. The 
second Simon died childless. In 1337 William de Bohun (c. 13 10- 
1360), a distinguished soldier, son of Humphrey de Bohun, 4th 
earl of Hereford and 3rd earl of Essex, was created earl of 
Northampton; and his son Humphrey, who succeeded, fell heir 
in 1361 to the earldoms of Hereford and Essex, which thus 
became united under that of Hereford. The titles, however, 
became extinct at his death in 1372. 

In 1547 William Parr (1513-1571), son of Sir Thomas Parr 
and brother of Catherine Parr, was created marquess of North- 
ampton, and though attainted in 1553 was recreated marquess 
in 1559. He took part in suppressing the rising in the north 
of England in 1537, and after serving as member of parliament 
for Northamptonshire was made Baron Parr in 1539. In 
December 1543, just after his sister had married the king, he 
was created earl of Essex, a title formerly held by his father-in- 
law, Henry Bourchier, who had died in March 1540. Under 
Edward VI., who called him "his honest uncle," Parr was 
equally prominent, being lord-lieutenant of five of the eastern 
counties, and being great chamberlain from 1550 to 1553. He 
favoured the claim of Lady Jane Grey to the English throne and 
consequently the accession of Queen Mary was quickly followed 
by his attainder. Although sentenced to death he was pardoned 
and released from prison at the end of 1553. After enjoying 
the favour of Queen Elizabeth, Northampton died at Warwick on 
the 28th of October 1571. He left no children and his mar- 
quessate became extinct. In 1604 Henry Howard (see below) 
was created earl of Northampton, his title dying with him. 
It next passed into the Compton family, where it has since 
remained. The 1st earl of Northampton in this line, William 
Compton (d. 1630), who received the title in 1618, was a great- 
grandson of the Sir William Compton (1482-1528) who was 
with Henry VIII. at the Field of the Cloth of Gold, and his son 
the 2nd earl is noticed below. The 9th earl, Charles Compton 
(1760-1828), was created a marquess in 1812, receiving at the 
same time the titles of Earl Compton and Baron Wilmington. 
His son Spencer Joshua Alwyne, the 2nd marquess (1790-1851), 
was president of the Royal Society from 1838 to 1848; the 
latter's son Lord Alwyne Compton (1825-1006) was bishop of 
Ely from 1886 to 1905. The 5th marquess (h. 1851), [son of the 
4th marquess (1818-1897), was, as Earl Compton, a Liberal 
member of parliament from 1889 to 1897. 

Henry Howard, earl of Northampton (1 540-1614), was 
the second son of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, the poet, 
and of Lady Frances Vere, daughter of the 15th earl of Oxford, 
and younger brother of Thomas Howard, 4th duke of Norfolk. 
He was educated first by Foxe the martyrologist, afterwards 
by John White, bishop of Lincoln, with whom he acquired 
Romanist opinions, and finally at the charge of Queen Elizabeth 
at King's College and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he obtained 
his M.A. degree in 1564, subsequently in 1568 being incorporated 
M.A. at Oxford. The discovery of his brother's plot to marry 
Mary, Queen of Scots, and of his own correspondence with her, 
deprived him of Elizabeth's favour, and he was arrested more 
than once on suspicion of harbouring treasonable designs. In 
1583 he published a work entitled A Defensative ' against the 
Poyson of supposed Prophecies, an osten sible at tack upon 
astrology, which, being declared to contain heresies and treason, 
led to his imprisonment. On regaining his liberty he is said to 
have travelled in Italy. His flattery of the queen in lengthy 
epistles met with no response, and his offer to take part in the 
national defence against the Spanish invasion was refused. He 
attached himself, however, both to Essex and to Robert Cecil, 
and through the influence of the latter was in 1600 again received 
by Elizabeth. At the close of the queen's reign he joined with 
Cecil in courting the heir to the throne in Scotland, the main 
object of his long letters of advice, which James termed " Asiatic 
and endless volumes," being to poison the royal mind against 
Sir Walter Raleigh and other rivals, whom he at the same time 
hoped to ensnare into compromising relations and correspondence 
with Spain. These methods, which could not influence Elizabeth, 
were completely successful with James, and on the latter's 
accession Howard received a multitude of favours. In 1603 
he was made a privy councillor, on the 1st of January 1604 
lord warden of the Cinque Ports, and on the 13th of March earl 
of Northampton and Baron Howard of Marnhull in Dorset; 
on the 24th of February 1605 he was given the Garter and on 
the 29th of April was appointed Lord Privy Seal. In 1609 
he was elected high steward of the university of Oxford, and in 
161 2 chancellor of Cambridge university. The same year he was 
appointed one of the commissioners of the treasury. 

He was one of the judges at the trials of Raleigh and Lord 
Cohham in 1603, of Guy Fawkes in 1605, and of Garnet in 1606, 
in each case pressing for a conviction. In 1604 he was one of 
the commissioners who composed the treaty of peace with Spain, 
and from that date he received from the Spanish Court a pension 
of £1000. The climax of his career was reached when he assisted 
his great-niece, Lady Essex, in obtaining her divorce from her 
husband in order to marry the favourite Somerset, whose 
mistress she already was, and whose alliance Northampton was 
eager to secure for himself. He ohtained the divorce by the 
decree of a special commission, and when Sir Thomas Overbury 's 
influence seemed likely to prevent Somerset completing the 
marriage project, he caused the former to be imprisoned in the 
Tower. Shortly afterwards Overbury died from the effects of 
poison administered by the direction of Lady Essex; and the close 
intimacy which existed between the latter and Northampton, 
together with his appointment of Sir Gervase Elwes or Helwys, 
a friend of his own, as the keeper of the victim, leaves his name 
tarnished with the blackest suspicions. The discovery of the 
crime was not made till some little time after Overbury had 
succumbed, and meanwhile Northampton's own death antici- 
pated his fall, together with that of Somerset, from power. 
He advised against the summoning of parliament in 1614, and 
then fomented disputes to compel James to dissolve it. He 
died unmarried on the 15th of June 16 14, when his title became 
extinct, and was buried in the chapel of Dover Castle, the 
monument erected above his grave being subsequently removed 
to the chapel at Greenwich College. His will shows that he died 
a Roman Catholic. 

Northampton, who was one of the most unscrupulous and treacher- 
ous charactersof the age, was nevertheless distinguished for his 
learning, artistic culture and his public charities. He built North- 
umberland House in London and superintended the construction 
of the fine house oi Audley End. He founded and planned several 
hospitals. Bacon included three of his sayings in his " Apophthegms," 
and chose him as " the learnedest councillor " in the kingdom to 
present to the king his Advancement of Learning. He was the author 
of a Treatise of Natural and Moral Philosophy (1569; MS. in the 
Bodleian Library) ; of a' pamphlet supporting the union between 
Elizabeth and the duke of Anjou (1580; Harleian MSS. 180); A 
Defensative against the Poyson of supposed Prophecies (1583); a 
reply to a pamphlet denouncing female government (1589; Harleian 
MS. 7021) ; Duello Foiled, printed in T. Hearne's Collection of Curious 
Discourses (1775), ii. 225, and ascribed there to Sir Edward Coke; 
Translation of Charles V. s Last Advice to Philip II., dedicated with a 
long epistle to the queen (Harl. 836, 1506 and elsewhere in Stowe 95, 
King's MSS. 106); devotional writings (Arundel MSS. 360); 
speeches at the trials of Guy Fawkes and Garnet in State Trials, 
vol. i. In Somers Tracts (ed. 1809), ii. 136, his opinions on the 
union between England and Scotland are recorded. 

See the life in Surrey's and WyatCs Poems, ed. by G. F. Nott 
(1815), and Sidney Lee's article in the Diet. Nat. Biog. 

Spencer Compton, 2nd earl of Northampton in the Compton 
line (1 601-1643), was tne son oi William, 1st earl, lord presi- 
dent of the marches, whose father had been created Baron 
Compton by Elizabeth, and of Elizabeth, daughter and heir 
of Sir John Spencer, lord mayor of London. On the 3rd of 
November 16 16 he was created a Knight of the Bath, and 
was elected for Ludlow in the parliament of 1621, the same 
year being appointed master of the robes to the prince of Wales 
and attending the latter in the adventure to Spain in 1623. 
He warmly supported the king in the Scottish expeditions, 
at the same time giving his advice for the summoning of the 
parliament, ' which "word of four syllables" he declared was 
" like the dew of heaven." 1 On the outbreak of the Civil War 
he was entrusted with the execution of the commission of array 
in Warwickshire. After varying success and failure in the 
Midlands he fought at Edgehill, and after the king's return to 
Oxford was given, in November 1642, the military supervision 
of Banbury and the neighbouring country. He was attacked 
in Banbury by the parliamentary forces on the 22nd of December, 
but relieved by Prince Rupert the next day. In March 1643 
he marched from Banbury to relieve Lichfield, and having 
failed there proceeded to Stafford, which he occupied. Thence 
on the 19th of March, accompanied by three of his sons, he 
marched out with his troops and engaged Sir John Gell and Sir 
William Brcreton at Hop ton Heath. He put to flight the enemy's 
cavalry and took eight guns, but in the moment of victory, 
while charging too far in advance, he was surrounded by the 
parliament soldiers. To these who offered him quarter he 
answered that " he scorned to take quarter from such base 
rogues and rebels as they were," whereupon he was despatched 
by a blow on the head. Clarendon describes his loss as a great 
one to the cause. Northampton married Mary, daughter of 
Sir Francis Beaumont, by whom besides two daughters he had 
six sons, of whom the eldest, James (1622-1681), succeeded 
him as 3rd carl of Northampton, Henry (1632-1713) became 
bishop of London, and Charles, William and Spencer all dis- 
tinguished themselves in the king's cause. The 3rd earl's third 

	1 Hardwicke State Papers, ii. 210. 

son Spencer (1673-1743) was a favourite of George II. and in 
1728 was created earl of Wilmington, a title which became 
extinct at his death. 

See the article in the Diet, of Nat. Biog. by C. H. Firth; E. B. G. 
Warburton's Life of Prince Rupert: S. R. Gardiner's Hist, of England 
and of the Civil War; Tkomason Tracts, E 99 (18) [Hopton Heath 
and Northampton's death], E 103 (11) [elegy], E in (n), E 110 
(8) 1642 [Proceedings at Banbury], E 83 (47) [speech], 


NORTHAMPTON, a municipal, county and parliamentary 
borough and the county town of Northamptonshire, England, 
66 m. N.W. by N. from London by the London & North Western 
railway; served also by a branch of the Midland railway. Pop. 
(1891) 75,075, (1901) 87,021, It lies in a slightly undulating 
district mainly on the north bank of the river Nene. The main 
roads converging upon the town meet near the centre in a 
spacious market-place, where stands a fountain on the site of 
the ancient cross destroyed by the fire of 1675 which levelled 
a great part of the town. There were formerly seven ancient 
parish churches, but only four remain. Of these All Saints 
church was rebuilt after the fire of 1675, but retains its Decorated 
embattled tower, with which the style of the later building 
scarcely harmonizes, the principal feature being the fine Ionic 
portico. The church of St Giles was originally a cruciform 
structure of the beginning of the 12th century, but has been 
greatly changed, and besides a rich Norman doorway contains 
specimens of Early English, Decorated and Perpendicular work, 
St Peter's, near the site of the ancient castle, is supposed to be 
of the same date with it, and its interior is a fine specimen of 
Norman architecture. St Sepulchre's, one of the four round 
churches still remaining in England, may have been built by 
the Knights Templars at the close of the nth century. There 
are several modern parish churches. Northampton is the seat 
of a Roman Catholic bishop, and there is a pro-cathedral, 
designed by A. W. Pugin (1864). In the neighbourhood of the 
town there were a Cluniac priory of St Andrew, a house (Delapre) 
for nuns of the same order, and one for Augustinian canons 
dedicated to St James; but the first has disappeared, the site 
of the second is occupied by a modern mansion, and of the third 
there are only slight fragments. Some portions of the castle 
were re-erected on a new site after their destruction when the 
Castle station was built by the London & North Western Railway 
Company. In the populous parish of Hardingstone, S. of the 
town, is one of the original Eleanor crosses, of which only three 
remain out of twelve erected by Edward I. to mark the resting- 
places of his queen's body on its way from Harby (Nottingham- 
shire) to burial at Westminster. The chief public buildings of 
Northampton are a town hall, county hall, county council 
room, corn exchange, antiquarian and geological museum, free 
library and barracks. The free grammar school was founded 
in 1552; the Northampton and county modern and technical 
schools were incorporated with it in 1894. There are a Roman 
Catholic convent with schools, and various charity schools. The 
charitable foundations include St John's hospital, founded in 
the 1 2th century; St Thomas's hospital, founded in 1450 in 
honour of Thomas a Becket, an infirmary, asylum, dispensary, 
&c. There is a race-course north of the town. The staple trade 
is the manufacture of boots and shoes, which is very large. 
There are also considerable currying and tanning works, 
breweries, iron foundries, and brick and tile works. The cattle 
market is extensive. The county borough was created in 1888. 
The municipal borough is under a mayor, 8 aldermen and 24 
councillors. Area, 3469 acres. 

British and Roman remains have been discovered near 
Northampton (Hamtune, Northantone), and it became the chief 
settlement of the Angle tribes who pushed their way up the Nen 
in the early part of the 6th century. It was occupied by the 
Danes in the reign of Edward the Elder and is said to have been 
burnt by Sweyn in 1010. In the reign of Edward the Confessor 
there were 60 burgesses in his demesne, and, although the 
number had decreased to 47 in 1086, a new borough containing 
40 burgesses had been formed. The burgesses rendered yearly 
to the sheriff £30, 10s. " which belonged to his farm," and 
was probably the beginning of the fee farm which they were 
allowed to pay directly to the king in 1185 and which was'then 
increased from £100 to £120. Forty marks of this farm were 
pardoned by Richard III. in 1484 because " the town had come 
to such ruin " that the bailiffs had to pay more than £53 from 
their own goods. The mayor was the chief officer in the 13th 
century, and Henry VI. granted the incorporation charter in 
1460 under the title of mayor, bailiffs and burgesses. The town 
has been represented by two members since 1395. Tanning 
was an industry of Northampton in the time of Edward I. and 
in 1675 a law was made by the corporation forbidding strangers 
to purchase hides in the town except on fair-days. Boots and 
shoes are known to have been made here in the reigns of John 
and Edward I., although probably only for the use of the towns- 
people, and by the 17th century Northampton was one of the 
most noted places in England for tneir manufacture. 

Northampton has been the meeting-place of several important 
councils and parliaments. In the wars between John and his 
barons the castle withstood a siege by the latter, but in 1264 
it was occupied by the barons under the earl of Leicester. In 
the Wars of the Roses it was the scene of the battle in which 
Henry VI. was defeated and taken prisoner in 1460. During 
the Civil Wars of the 17th century it was held for the parliament 
by Lord Brooke. In 1675 the town suffered severely by fire, 
600 houses being destroyed. 

See Victoria County History, Northampton; C. H. Hartshorn, 
Historical Memorials of Northampton (1848). 


NORTHAMPTON, ASSIZE OF, a short code of English laws 
issued in U76, is drawn up in the form of instructions to six 
committees of three judges each, which were to visit the six 
circuits into which England was divided for the purpose. Though 
purporting to be a reissue of the Assize of Clarendon (1166), 
it contains in fact many new provisions. As compared with 
the earlier assize it prescribes greater severity of punishment 
for criminal offences; arson and forgery were henceforth to be 
Crimes about which the jurors are to enquire; and those who 
failed at the ordeal were to lose a hand as well as a foot. In what 
is perhaps the most important section we may probably see the 
origin of the possessory action of tnort a"ancestor t an innovation 
scarcely less striking than the institution of the novel disseisin 
in the winter of 1166. The justices were also ordered to try 
proprietary actions commenced by the king's writ for the 
recovery of land held by the service of half a knight's fee or less. 
In their fiscal capacity they were to enquire into escheats, 
churches, lands and women in the king's gift. The royal bailiffs 
were to answer at the exchequer for rents of assize and all the 
perquisites which they made in their offices, and apparently 
the duty of enforcing this provision was entrusted to the justices. 
As a result of the rebellion of 1 1 73-1 1 74 it was provided that an 
oath of fealty should be taken by all, " to wit, barons, knights, 
freeholders and even villeins (rustici)", and that any one who 
refused should be arrested as the king's enemy, and the justices 
were to see that the castles whose demolition had been ordered 
were completely razed. 

Authorities. — Sir F. Pollock and F. W. Maitland, History of 
English Law before the Time of Edward I. (Cambridge, 1898); W, 
Stubbs, Constitutional History of England (Oxford, 1895). Thetext 
of the Assize occurs in Cronica Kogert de Howden (Rolls Scries), ii. 89, 
and Gesta Henrici Regis Secundi (Rolls Series), i, 108. It has been 
reprinted from the latter by W. Stubbs in Select Charters (Oxford, 
1895). ' (G.J.T.) 


NORTHAMPTON, a city and the county-seat of Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, U.SjA., situated on the Connecticut 
river, about 16 m. N. of Springfield. % Pop. (1910 census) 
19,431, The city has an area of 35*3 sq. m. The chief village, 
Northampton, is on the New York, New Haven & Hartford, 
and the Boston & Maine railways. It lies on the border of the 
meadow-land, and with its irregular, semi-rural streets, and 
venerable trees is considered one of the prettiest villages in New 
England. About 2 m. S.E. of Northampton is Mount Holyoke 
(954 ft.), which may be ascended by carriage road and mountain 
railway, and the summit of which commands a magnificent 
view. The city is the seat of a state hospital for the insane; 
of the Clarke School for the Deaf (1867, founded by John 
Clarke of Northampton); of Smith College, one of the foremost 
colleges for women in the country; of the Mary A. Burnham 
School for Girls (1877), a preparatory school chiefly for Smith 
College, founded by Miss Mary A. Burnham; and of the Miss 
Capen School (preparatory) for girls. Besides the college library, 
there are in Northampton two public libraries, the Clarke (1850) 
and the Forbes (1894). The Forbes library was established 
with funds left by Charles E. Forbes (1 795-1881), from 1848 
to 1 88 1 a justice of the state supreme court. The People's 
Institute was started as a Home-Culture Clubs movement by 
George \V. Cable, who became a resident of Northampton in 
1886. The Smith Charities is a peculiar institution, endowed by 
Oliver Smith (1 766-1 845) of Hatfield, who left an estate valued 
at $370,000, to be administered by a board of three trustees, 
chosen by electors representing the towns of Northampton, 
Hadley, Hatfield, Amherst and Williamsburg in Hampshire 
county and Greenfield and Whately in Franklin county — the 
beneficiaries of the will. .The will was contested by Smith's 
heirs, but in 1847 was sustained by the supreme judicial court 
of Massachusetts. Of the total sum, $200,000 was to accumulate 
until it became $400,000. Of this $30,000 was to found Smith's 
Agricultural School at Northampton, which opened for instruction 
in 1908; an income of $10,000 was to be paid to the American 
Colonization Society, but this society failed to comply with 
the restrictions imposed by the will, and the $10,000 was in- 
corporated with the Agricultural School fund; and $360,000 
was devoted to indigent boys and girls, indigent young women 
and indigent widows. The remainder of Smith's property was 
constituted a contingent fund to defray expenses and keep the 
principal funds intact. Florence, a village on the Mill river in 
the city limits, is a manufacturing village, silk being its principal 
product, and cutlery and brushes being of minor importance. 
The value of the city's factory products increased from $4,706,820 
in 1900 to $5,756,381 in 1905, or 22-3%. Northampton was 
first settled in 1654, became a township in 1656, and was in- 
corporated as a city in 1883. In September 1786, at the time of 
the Shays Rebellion, the New Hampshire Gazette (still published; 
daily edition since 1890) was established here in the interest 
of the state administration. Jonathan Edwards was pastor 
here from 1727 to 1750. Caleb Strong (1745-1819), a member 
of the Federal Constitutional Convention of 1787, and governor 
of Massachusetts in 1800- 180 7 and 181 2-1 81 6; Joseph Hawley 
( 1 7 23-1 788) , one of the most prominent patriots of western Massa- 
chusetts; Timothy Dwight; Arthur (1786-1865), Benjamin, 
and Lewis (1 788-1873) Tappan, prominent philanthropists and 
anti-slavery men; and William D. Whitney were natives of 
Northampton. 

See J. R. Trumbull, History of Northampton (2 vols., Northampton, 
1 898-1 902). 


NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, an east midland county of England, 
bounded N. by Lincolnshire, N.W. by Rutland and Leicester- 
shire, W. by Warwickshire, S.W. and S. by Oxfordshire, S.E. 
by Buckinghamshire, and E. by Bedfordshire, Huntingdonshire 
and Cambridgeshire. The area is 1003*1 sq. m. The surface 
is undulating and somewhat monotonous, notwithstanding 
that the country is richly cultivated and in some parts finely 
wooded. Elevations over 700 ft. are few. The most picturesque 
scenery is found in the western and south-western districts. 
For long Northamptonshire has been famed for its ash trees, 
and there are also some very old oaks, such as that associated 
with Cowper's posthumous poem*" Yardley Oak," in Yardley 
Chase near Northampton, as well as a few fine avenues of elm. 
The north-eastern extremity belongs to the great Fen district. 
The county forms the principal watershed of central England, 
nearly all the more important rivers of this region having their 
.sources within its boundaries. The Avon, with a westward 
course, forms for some distance the northern boundary of the 
county, till near Lilbourne it passes into Warwickshire. The 
Nene passes southward past Northampton, whence it takes 
an easterly course, skirting the eastern boundary of the county. 
The Weliand flows in an easterly direction, forming the boundary 
of the county with Leicester, Rutland and Lincoln. The 
Cherwell, rising in a spring at Charwelton, where it is crossed 
by a very ancient bridge, passes into Oxfordshire, and then 
forms for a considerable distance the southernmost portion of 
the boundary of Northamptonshire with that county; the 
Learn forms a portion of the boundary with Warwickshire. 
The Ouse, which rises near Brackley, soon afterwards leaves 
the county ,'but again touches it near Stony Stratford, separating 
it for some distance from Buckinghamshire. 

Geology. — With the exception of the superficial glacial and river 
deposits, all the rocks exposed in the county are of Jurassic age; 
they all dip in a general way towards the S.E., the strike of the 
outcrops being from south-west to north-east. The oldest rocks 
exposed belong to the Liassic formation; they come to the surface 
over a large area in the south-west and centre, around Banbury, 
Daventry and Market Harborough.andby the removal of the over- 
lying Oolitic strata they are exposed along the rivers and stream 
courses near Towcester, Northampton, Wellingborough and Ketter- 
ing. The Lower Lias, blue clay with limestone bands and cement 
stones, has few exposures ; it has been cut through by the railways 
at Kilsby and Catesby, and at Braunston it is dug for brick-making. 
The Middle Lias consists of grey micaceous marls, sandstones and 
clays, often ferruginous; ironstone appears near King's Sutton; 
at the top is the marlstone or " rock bed," used as a building stone 
and for road metal. The Upper Lias is again a blue argillaceous 
series of strata, with limestones and cement stones; it is employed 
for brick-making. # Through the middle of the county from north- 
east to south-west is an elevated tract of Oolitic rocks which contrasts 
strongly with the low-lying grass-covered Liassic ground. The lowest 
subdivision cf the Inferior Oolite, sands, sandstone and calcareous 
beds, is an important source of iron ore, with from 9 to 12 ft. of 
workable beds at Blisworth, Kettering, Northampton, Thrapstone, 
Towcester and Wellingborough. The flaggy sandstone of Duston 
(Duston slate) belongs to this series. The upper part of the North- 
ampton sands is known as the Lower Estuarine Beds; these are 
white and reddish clays and sands. In the north-eastern part of 
the county from about Maidwell, the Lincolnshire Limestone is 
developed^ at the expense of the Northampton Sand; the well- 
known building stone of Barnack (Barnack Rag) and Weldon belong 
to this horizon; a hard shelly variety is known as Weldon or Stam- 
ford marble. Locally at the base is^ a series of flaggy strata, the 
Collyweston slates. The Great Oolite series comprise the Upper 
Estuarine Beds, the Great Oolite Limestone, Great Oolite Clay, 
Forest Marble and Cornbrash (very fossiliferous at Rushden). On 
the south-east border a belt of Oxford Clay occupies the surface; 
good exposures occur in the brick-fields about Peterborough. Glacial 
sands and gravels, including the great Chalky Boulder Clay, occur in 
patches on the older rocks, as at^Hillmorton, and fill up old channels 
of the rivers sometimes to a considerable depth, as in the old valley of 
the Ouse at Furtho, where the Boulder Clay is 100 ft. thick, Borings 
have revealed the existence of Rhaetic and Keuper rocks resting 
on an ancient quartz-porphyrite beneath the Lias at Orton; and at 
Gayton and Northampton the Carboniferous and possibly Old Red 
Sandstone strata have been proved, but no Coal Measures were en- 
countered. The water-bearing strata of Northamptonshire include 
the marlstone of the Lias, the Lincolnshire Limestone, Collyweston 
beds and ironstone^ beds of the Inferior Oolite, and the Cornbrash 
and Great Oolite Limestone. 

Climate and Agriculture. — The climate of Northamptonshire 
is mild and genial, while the absence of lofty hills renders it much 
drier than many other inland districts. The mean annual 
rainfall at Wellingborough is 27-2 ins. The prevailing soil is a 
rich brown but light and crumbling mould, sometimes with a 
rocky subsoil. The richest soil is the black mould of the fen 
district, which is specially suited for grass, as are all the heavier 
soils. Nearly all the land is capable of cultivation, although 
there is some stiff wet soil on the slopes of the hills. Nearly 
nine-tenths of the total area, a high proportion, is under cultiva- 
tion, and of this considerably over three-fifths is in permanent 
pasture, the acreage devoted to this use increasing steadily. 
Less than one-fifth is under grain crops, and the area decreases. 
Wheat -and barley are the principal grain crops. The fattening 
of cattle is the chief occupation of the Northamptonshire fanner. 
The favourite stock for breeding purposes is the shorthorn, but 
the most common custom is to buy in Hereford, Scotch, VVelsh 
and Irish cattle in the spring and fatten them on the rich pastures, 
a few being retained and fed for the Christmas market. In 
autumn additional cattle are bought in to eat the coarse grass 
off the pastures, and these are usually retained during winter. 
The most common breed of sheep on the rich pastures is the 
improved Leicester, which is preferred on account of its length 
of wool; but the Southdown, on account of its superior flesh, 
is also largely kept. 

Manufactures. — The iron industry is of considerable import- 
ance, though only a small proportion of the metal is smelted in 
the county. The industry is carried on in the central part of 
the county, as in the Kettering, Wellingborough and Thrapston 
districts, and in the north near Stamford. But Northamptonshire 
is more famous for its manufacture of boots and shoes, which is 
chiefly prosecuted in the towns and villages of the central and 
southern districts, and along the eastern border. This trade 
occupies some three-quarters of the total number of hands 
employed in factories in the county. 

Communications. — The main line of the London & North Western 
railway passes through the south-western portion of the county, 
with an alternative route to Northampton, and branches to Peter- 
borough and elsewhere. With it are connected at Blisworth Junction 
the East and West Junction railway to Towcester, Woodford and 
Stratford-on-Avon, and the Northampton and Banbury Junction 
railway. The Great Central main line, crossing the county in the 
south, has connexion with the Great Westen railway at Banbury 
from Woodford. The Midland railway serves Wellingborough, 
Kettering and Northampton, and an important junction of systems 
is effected at Peterborough, which is on the main line of the Great 
Northern railway. Branch lines of this and the Midland system 
complete the railway communications of the county. The Grand 
Junction Canal, which is connected with the Oxford Canal, enters 
the county at Braunston on the borders of Warwickshire, and passes 
by Daventry and Blisworth into Buckinghamshire, a branch con- 
necting it with Northampton. The Grand Union Canal unites with 
the Grand Junction near Daventry, and runs north until it joins 
the Leicester Canal at Foxton, branches passing to Welford and 
Market Harborough. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the county is 
641,992 acres, with a population in 1891 of 302,183 and in 1901 
of 338,088. The area of the administrative county of North- 
ampton is 585,148 acres, and that of the administrative county 
of the soke of Peterborough 53,464 acres. In Domesday the 
county is mentioned as containing 30 hundreds, but it then 
included a considerable part of Rutland. These divisions were 
first reduced to 28, and in the reign of Henry II. to 20, their 
present number. The administrative counties include four 
municipal boroughs, namely, Brackley (pop. 2467), Daventry 
(3 780) , Higham Ferrers (2540) and Peterborough (30,87 2) , 
together with the municipal and county borough of Northampton 
(87,021). The urban districts are: Desborough (3573), Finedon 
(4129), Irthiingborough (4314), Kettering (28,653), Oundle 
(2404), Raunds (3811), Rothwell (4193), Rushden (12,453), 
Wellingborough (18,41 2). There are one court of quarter sessions 
and nine petty sessional divisions. The borough of Northampton 
and the liberty of the soke of Peterborough have each a separate 
court of quarter sessions and a separate commission of the peace. 
The total number of civil parishes is 346, of which 33 are in the 
soke of Peterborough. The ancient county contains 297 entire 
ecclesiastical parishes or districts, wholly or in part, most of 
them being in the diocese of Peterborough; but small parts of 
the county fall within the dioceses of Oxford, Ely and Worcester. 
For parliamentary purposes the county is divided into four 
divisions (Northern, Eastern, Mid and Southern), and includes 
the parliamentary borough of Northampton, and part of the 
parliamentary borough of Peterborough, each returning one 
member, except the borough of Northampton, which returns 
two members. 

History. — At some time in the 7th century the district which is 
now Northamptonshire suffered a simultaneous invasion by 
the West Saxons from the south and the Anglian tribes from 
the north, and relics discovered in the county testify to a mingh'ng 
of races, at the same time showing that West Saxon influence 
never spread farther north than a line from Daventry to Warwick, 
and with the extension of the Mercian kingdom under Penda 
and the conversion of the midland districts ceased altogether. 
The abbey at Medehamstede (now Peterborough) was begun 
by Peada in 655, and about the same time foundations were 
established at Peakirk, Weedon Beck, Castor and Oundle. 
In 870 the district was overrun by the Danes, and Northampton 
was one of the five Danish boroughs, until in 921 it was recovered 
by Edward the Elder, who fortified Towcester in that year. 

	xix. 25 

In the nth century Northamptonshire was included in Tostig's 
northern earldom; but in 1065, together with Huntingdonshire, 
it was detached from Northumbria and bestowed on Waltheof. 
The only monastic foundation which survived the Conquest 
was Peterborough. Norman castles existed at Rockingham, 
Barnwell, Lilbourne and Northampton. 

As a shire Northamptonshire was probably of Danish origin, 
representing in the 10th century the area which owed allegiance 
to Northampton as a political and administrative centre. In 
921 this area extended to the Welland, the present northern 
limit of the county, and at the time of the Domesday Survey 
the boundaries were approximately those of the present day. 
Northamptonshire is first mentioned by name in the Historia 
EliensiSy in connexion with events which occurred at the close 
of the 10th century. 

The Geld roll of the time of William I. and the Domesday 
Survey of 1086 mention 28 hundreds in Northamptonshire, 
and part of Rutland is assessed under this county. By 13 16 
the divisions had undergone considerable changes, both in name 
and in extent, and had been reduced to their present number, 
20, since which date they have remained practically unaltered. 
The names of the hundreds point to primitive meeting-places 
gradually superseded by villages and towns, and the court for 
Fawsley hundred met under a large beech tree in Fawsley Park 
until the beginning of the 18th century, when it was transferred 
to Everdon. The shire-court originally met at Northampton. 

Northamptonshire was originally included in the diocese of 
Lincoln. The archdeaconry of Northampton is mentioned in 
the 1 2th century, and in 1291 included the deaneries of Peter- 
borough, Northampton, Brackley, Oundle, Higham, Daventry, 
Preston, Weldon, Rothwell and Haddon. The diocese of Peter- 
borough was created in 1541, and in 1875 tne archdeaconry 
of Oakham was formed and included in this county the first 
and second deaneries of Peterborough and the deaneries of 
Oundle, Weldon and Higham Ferrers. Northampton arch- 
deaconry now includes the first, second and third deaneries of 
Brack well and Rothwell; the first and second deaneries of 
Haddon and Preston, and the deaneries of Daventry, North- 
ampton and Weldon. 

At the time of the Domesday Survey the chief lay-tenant in 
Northamptonshire was Robert, earl of Mortain, whose fief 
escheated to the crown in 1106. The estates of William Peverel 
founder of the abbey of St James at Northampton, also escheated 
to the crown in the 12th century. Holdenby House was built 
by Sir Christopher Hat ton, privy councillor to Queen Elizabeth, 
and Yardley Hastings was named from the Hastings, formerly 
earls of Pembroke. Higham Ferrers was the seat of the Ferrers 
family; Braybrook Castle was built by Robert de Braybrook, 
a favourite of King John; and Burghley House gave the title 
of baron to William Cecil. 

Northampton was a favourite meeting-place of the councils 
and parliaments of the Norman and Plantagenet kings. In 
1 21 5 John was besieged in Northampton Castle by the barons, 
and in 1264 Henry III. captured the castle from the younger 
Simon de Montfort. During the Wars of the Roses Henry VI. 
was defeated at Northampton in 1460. In the Civil War of the 
17th century the county declared almost unanimously for the 
parliament. A royalist garrison was placed at Towcester by 
Prince Rupert in 1644, but almost immediately withdrawn. 

The iron-mines and stone-quarries of Northamptonshire were 
worked in Roman times, but the former were entirely neglected 
from the Plantagenet period until their rediscovery in 1850, 
while the two most famous quarries, those of Barnack and Stanion, 
were exhausted about the 16th century. The wool and leather 
industries flourished in Norman times. In the 17th century 
the weaving industry declined in the Northampton district, but 
became very flourishing about Kettering. Other early industries 
were charcoal-burning, brick and tile manufacture and brewing. 
The industries of whip-making, pipe-making, silk-weaving and 
paper-making were introduced in the 17th and 18th centuries. 

In 1290 Northamptonshire returned two members to parlia- 
ment, and in 1295 Northampton also returned two members. 
In 1547 Brackley and Peterborough returned each two members, 
and in 1557 Higham Ferrers returned one member. Under the 
act of 1832 the county returned four members in two divisions, 
and Brackley and Higham Ferrers were disfranchised. 

Antiquities. — Although Northamptonshire was rich in monastic 
foundations, remains, except of the abbey-church of Peter- 
borough, afterwards the cathedral, are of small importance. 
At Geddington, and also at Hardingstone, near Northampton, 
there is an Eleanor cross, erected by Edward I. to the memory 
of his queen, in good preservation. For the architecture of its 
churches Northampton holds a place scarcely inferior to any 
other English county. To the Saxon period belong the tower 
of Earls Barton church, which stands on an eminence, probably 
the mound of an old English strong-house; the tower and other 
portions at Brigstock; the ground plan and other portions at 
Wittering; the remarkable tower at Barnack; and Brix worth 
church, constructed in part of Roman materials, and by some 
believed to include part of a Roman basilica. Of Norman, 
besides the cathedral of Peterborough, the finest examples are 
St Peter's and St Sepulchre's, Northampton, and the tower of 
Castor church. St Mary's church, Higham Ferrers, formerly 
collegiate, Early English and Decorated, is one of the finest 
churches in the county, and, as specially noteworthy among 
many beautiful buildings, there may be mentioned the churches 
at Irthlingborough and Lowick, with their lantern towers, 
Warmington, a very fine specimen of Early English work, 
Rushden, Finedon, Raunds and Fotheringhay. Of the church 
at Easton Maudit, Percy, author of the Reliques, and afterwards 
Bishop of Dromore, was rector. 

A gateway at Rockingham, and earth-works at Higham 
Ferrers and Brackley are worthy of mention. Some castellated 
ruins remain of the castle at Fotheringhay, famous as the scene 
of the imprisonment, trial and execution of Mary, Queen of 
Scots. Barnwell Castle, founded by William the Conqueror, 
an interesting example of the defensive construction of the 
period, is still a fine ruin, which includes four of the round towers 
and an imposing gateway. Holdenby Manor House, where Sir 
Christopher Hatton (1540-1591) was born, and where Charles I. 
was staying when he was carried away by Cornet Joyce, is 
largely restored. Among ancient mansions are Castle Ashby, 
the seat of the Comptons,. the oldest portion belonging to the 
reign of Henry VIII.; Althorp, the seat of the Spencers, of 
various dates; Drayton House, of the time of Henry VI.; the 
vast pile of Burghley House, Stamford, founded by Lord Burleigh 
( I 553) J but more than once altered and enlarged; and Kirby 
Hall, a beautiful Elizabethan building once the residence of 
Sir Christopher Hatton. 

See Victoria County 'History, Northamptonshire ; G. Baker, History 
and Antiquities of the County of Northampton (2 vols., London, 1822- 
1841); John Bridges, History and Antiquities of Northamptonshire, 
compiled by Rev. Peter Whalley (2 vols., Oxford, 1791); John 
Norden, Speculi Britanniae, pars altera* or A Delineation of North- 
amptonshire (London, 1 720); Francis Whellan, History, Topography 
and Directory of Northamptonshire (2nd ed., London, 1874). 


NORTH BERWICK, a royal and police burgh of Haddington- 
shire, Scotland. Pop. (1901) 2614. It is situated on the south 
shore of the entrance to the Firth of Forth, 22J m. E.N.E. of 
Edinburgh by the North British railway, being the terminus 
of a branch line from Drem Junction. It was created a royal 
burgh by Robert III. (d. 1406), and though once a port of some 
importance it dwindled to a fishing hamlet. In the latter half 
of the 19th century, however, it gradually became a fashionable 
watering-place, much frequented for its firm sandy beach and 
bathing, and especially for its two golf-courses. Near the 
station are the ruins of the abbey of Cistercian nuns founded by 
David I. Immediately to the south rises the fine cone of North 
Berwick Law (612 ft.), which was utilized as a signal point at the 
period of the Napoleonic scare. 

About 3 m. E. stand the strikingly picturesque ruins of Tantallon 
Castle, which probably dates from the end of the 14th century and 
was for many generations the stronghold of the Angus Douglases. 
Though the 6th earl successfully resisted the sieges of James V. in 
1528 and 1530, the castle had at last to be surrendered by treaty. 
It was besieged and captured by General Monk in 1651, and some 
time after the restoration became the property of Sir Hew Dalrymple, 
lord president of session, whose family still own it. It was then 
dismantled and fell into decay. 

About 2 m. S.W. of North Berwick is Dirleton, with a castle dating 
from the 12th century. Edward I. took it in 1298, and in the reign 
of Robert Bruce it was acquired by the Haliburtons, from whom 
it passed to the family of Ruthven. On the failure of the Gowrie 
conspiracy (1600) the castle was forfeited and given to Sir Thomas 
Erskine (1 566-1 639), who became Baron Dirleton in 1604, two 
years later Viscount Fen ton, and in 1619 earl of Kellie. Monk laid 
siege to the castle in 1650, and in 1663 it was purchased by Sir John 
Nisbet ( 1 600-1 687), lord advocate, afterwards a lord of session 
and Lord Dirleton. 


NORTHBROOK, THOMAS GEORGE BARING, ist Earl of 
(1826-1904), English statesman, eldest son of the first baron 
(long known as Sir Francis Baring; see Baring), was born on 
the 22nd of January 1826, and educated at Christ Church, 
Oxford, where he graduated with honours in 1846. He entered 
upon a political career, and was successively private secretary 
to Mr Labouchere (Lord Taunton), Sir George Grey, and Sir 
Charles Wood (Viscount Halifax). In 1857 he was returned 
to the House of Commons in the Liberal interest for Penryn 
and Falmouth, which constituency he continued to represent 
until he became a peer on the death of his father in 1866. He 
was a lord of the admiralty in 1857-T858; under-secretary for 
war, 1 861; for India, 1 861-1864; for the home department, 
1864-1866; and secretary to the admiralty, 1866. When 
Mr Gladstone acceded to power in 1868, Lord Northbrook was 
again appointed under-secretary for war, and this office he held 
until February 1872, when he was appointed governor-general 
of India. In January 1876, however, he resigned. He had 
recommended the conclusion of arrangements with Shere Ah" 
which, as has since been admitted, would have prevented the 
second Afghan war; but his policy was overruled by the duke 
of Argyll, then secretary of state. Lord Northbrook was created 
Viscount Baring of Lee in the county of Kent and earl of North- 
brook in the county of Southampton. From 1880 to 1885 he 
held the post of first lord of the admiralty in Air Gladstone's 
second government. During his tenure of office the state of 
the navy aroused much public anxiety and led to a strong 
agitation in favour of an extended shipbuilding programme. 
The agitation called forth Tennyson's poem " The Fleet." 
In September 1884 Lord Northbrook was sent to Egypt as 
special commissioner to inquire into its finances and condition. 
The inquiry was largely unnecessary, all the essential facts being 
well known, but the mission was a device of Mr Gladstone's 
to avoid an immediate decision on a perplexing question. Lord 
Northbrook, after six weeks of inquiry in Egypt, sent in two 
reports, one general, advising against the withdrawal of the 
British garrison, one financial. His financial proposals, if 
accepted, would have substituted the financial control of Great 
Britain for the international control proposed at the London 
Conference of June-August of the same year. A heavy blow 
would thus have been struck at internationalism in Egypt. 
Mr Gladstone was not, however, prepared to give a British 
guarantee of the interest of the loan, and so Lord Northbrook's 
mission proved abortive. The £9,000,000 loan issued in 1885 
bound Egypt even more securely in international fetters (see 
Cromer's Modern Egypt, 1908, vol. ii. chap. xlv.). When Mr 
Gladstone formed his third ministry in 1886 Lord Northbrook 
held aloof, being opposed to the home rule policy of the premier; 
and he then ceased to take a prominent part in political life. 
In 1890 he was appointed lord-lieu tenant of Hampshire; He 
died on the 15th of November 1904. He had married in 1848 
Elizabeth Sturt, sister of Lord Alington, and was succeeded as 
2nd earl by his eldest son, who as Lord Baring had been M.P. 
for Winchester (1880-1885) and North Bedford (1886-1892). 

See B. Mallet, Thomas George, Earl of Northbrook (1908). 


NORTH CAPE (Nordkap), a promontory on the island Magero 
off the north coast of Norway in 70 10' 40* N., 25 45' E., 78 m. 
N.E. of Hammerfest. Knivskjaerodden, an island a little to 
the west, actually reaches a point a little farther north than the 
North Cape, and Nordkyn, 4s m. E., is the northern extremity 
of the mainland (7i°7'N.). The desolate cape, rising abruptly 
over 1000 ft. from the sea, is frequently visited during the 
summer period of the " midnight sun/' but travellers are often 
prevented from seeing this phenomenon by adverse atmospheric 
conditions. 


NORTH CAROLINA, a South Atlantic state of the United 
States of America, situated between latitudes 33 51' 37* (the 
southernmost point of the southern boundary — 35 is the 
northernmost) andabout36° 34' 25-5* N., and between longitudes 
75 27' W. and 84 20' W. It is bounded N. by Virginia, E. and 
S.E. by the Atlantic Ocean, S. and S.W. by South Carolina, 
S. also by Georgia, and W. and N.W. by Tennessee. North 
Carolina has an extreme length from E. to W, of 503J m., which 
is greater than that of any other state cast of the Mississippi 
river. It total area is 52,426 sq. m., of which 3686 sq. m. are 
water surface. 

Physical Features. — The state lies wholly within the three 
leading topographical regions of the eastern portion of the 
United States: the Coastal Plain Region, which occupies 
approximately the eastern half, the Piedmont Plateau Region, 
which occupies about 20,000 sq. m. in the middle, and the 
Appalachian Region, which occupies about 6000 sq. m. in the 
west. At the eastern extremity of the Coastal Plain Region 
an outer coast line is formed by a chain of long narrow barrier 
beaches from which project capes Hatteras, Lookout and Fear, 
whose outlying shoals are known for their dangers to navigation. 
Between Hatteras and Lookout is Raleigh Bay and between 
Lookout and Fear is Onslow Bay; and between the chain of 
islands and the deeply indented mainland Currituck, Albemarle, 
Pamlico and other sounds form an extensive area, especially 
to the northward, of shallow, brackish and almost tideless water. 
Projecting into these sounds and between the estuaries of rivers 
flowing into them are extensive tracts of swamp land — the 
best known of these is Dismal Swamp, which lies mostly in 
Virginia and is about 30 m. long and 10 m. wide. Through 
most of the Coastal Plain Region, which extends inland from 
80 to 150 m., the country continues very level or only slightly 
undulating, and rises to the westward at the rate of little more 
than 1 ft. to the mile. Along the W. border of this region, 
however, the slope becomes greater and there are some hills. 
The " Fall Line," the boundary between the Coastal Plain and 
the Piedmont Plateau, has a very irregular course across North 
Carolina, but lies in a general S.W. direction from the Falls of 
Roanoke between Halifax and Northampton counties to Anson 
county on the South Carolina border and marks a rapid increase 
in elevation of about 200 ft. The Piedmont Plateau Region 
extends from this line to the Blue Ridge Escarpment, toward 
which its mean elevation increases at the rate of about 3^ ft. 
to the mile. It is traversed from N.E. to S.W. by a series of 
ridges which in the E. portion produce only a general undulating 
surface but to the westward become higher and steeper until 
the country assumes a bold and rugged aspect. The S.E. 
face of the Blue Ridge Escarpment, which rises precipitously 
1 200-1 500 ft. or more above the Piedmont Platea'u, forms the 
S.E. border of North Carolina's Appalachian Mountain Region, 
which includes the high Unaka Mountain Range, segments of 
which are known by such local names as Iron Mountains, Bald 
Mountains and Great Smoky Mountains. These ranges reach 
their culmination in this state, and with a series of more or less 
interrupted cross ranges constitute the greatest masses of 
mountains in the E. half of the United States. Four peaks 
along the Blue Ridge have an elevation exceeding 5000 ft. — one 
of these, the Grandfather, rises 5964 ft.; and about thirty 
peaks in the Unakas and in the several cross ranges exceed 
6000 ft., the highest being Mount Mitchell or Mitchell Dome 
(67 1 1 ft.), of the Black Mountains, a short cross range extending 
N. from the Blue Ridge through Yancey County. Other note- 
worthy peaks are Black Brother (6690 ft.) and Hairy Bear (6681 
ft.), the next highest mountains. Many of the neighbouring 
mountain ridges have uniform crests, but a greater number 
terminate in numerous peaks, some sharp, rugged and rocky, but 
more of them rounded domes. Throughout the whole region the 
slopes vary greatly: the N.W. slope of the Blue Ridge is almost 
imperceptible, or confused with the numerous mountain slopes 
that rise above it. As a rule the mountain slopes arc well graded 
and subdued, but a few are steep and some are rocky and pre- 
cipitous. The numerous valleys are usually narrow and deep, 
though few, if any, descend to less than 2000 ft. above the sea. 

The Blue Ridge is the principal water parting of the state. West 
of it the Hiwassee, the Little Tennessee and the French Broad rivers 
flow W. or N.W. into Tennessee. Farther N. are the headwaters of 
the New river, which flows N.E. and finds its way to the Ohio. 
On the S.E. slope of the Blue Ridge rise the Broad, the Catawba 
and the Yadkin, which flow for some distance a little N. of E., then, 
finding a passage across one of the ridges of the Piedmont Plateau, 
turn to the S.S.E. and across the boundary line into South Carolina, 
in which state their waters reach the Atlantic. In the N.W. part of 
the Piedmont Plateau Region, and a little to the N. of the most N.E. 
course of the Yadkin rises the Dan, which in its N.E. course crosses 
the boundary into^ Virginia, where it becomes a tributary of the 
Roanoke, in which its waters are returned to North Carolina near the 
" Fall Line." The other principal rivers — the Cape Fear, the Neuse 
and the Tar — rise in the N.E. part of the Piedmont Plateau Region, 
have their S.E. courses wholly within the state, and, with the 
Roanoke, drain the Coastal Plain Region. In the Mountain Region 
and in the Piedmont Plateau Region the rivers have numerous falls 
and rapids which afford a total water power unequalled perhaps in 
any other state than Maine on the Atlantic Coast, the largest being 
on the Yadkin, Roanoke and Catawba; and in crossing some of the 
mountains, especially the Unakas, the streams have carved deep 
narrow gorges that are much admired for their scenery. In contrast 
with the rivers of these regions those of the Coastal Plain are sluggish, 
and toward their mouths expand into wide estuaries. 

The Coastal Plain Region is the only part of the state that has any 
lakes, and these are chiefly shallow bodies of water, with sandy 
bottoms, in the midst of swamps. In all they number only about 
fifteen, and have an area estimated at 200 sq. m., about one-half of 
which is contained in Lake Mattamuskeet in Hyde county. 

Flora.— In North Carolina's flora are many species common to 
sub-tropical regions and many common to temperate regions, and 
the variety is consequently very great. In the swamps are the bald 
cypress, the white cedar and the live oak, usually draped in southern 
long moss; south of Cape Fear river are palmettos, magnolias, 
prickly ash, the American olive and mock orange; along streams 
in the Coastal Plain Region are the sour gum, the sweet bay and 
several species of oak; but the tree that is most predominant 
throughout the upland portion of this region is the long-leaf or 
southern pine. In the Piedmont Plateau Region oaks, hickories and 
elms are the most common. In the Mountain Region at the bases of 
the mountains are oaks, hickories, chestnuts and white poplars: 
above these are hemlocks, beeches, birches, elms, ashes, maples and 
limes; and still higher up are spruce, white pine and balsam; and 
all but a comparatively few of the higher mountains are forest-clad to 
their summits. All of the species of pine and of magnolia, and nearly 
all of the species of oak, of hickory and of spruce, indigenous to the 
United States, are found in North Carolina. On the dome-like tops 
of such mountains as are too high for trees are large clusters of 
rhododendrons and patches of grasses fringed with flowers. The 
forests throughout most of the state have a luxuriant undergrowth 
consisting of a great variety^ of shrubs, flowering plants, grasses, 
ferns and mosses, and the display of magnolias, azaleas, kalmias, 
golden rod, asters, jessamines, smilax, ferns and mosses is often one 
of unusual beauty. Venus's fly-trap (Dionaea muscipula), a rare 
plant, is found only south of the Neuse river; and there are several 
varieties of Sarracenia, carnivorous pitcher plants. Among the fruit- 
bearing trees, shrubs, vines and plants the grape, the blue-berry, the 
cherry, the plum and the cranberry are indigenous and more or less 
common. Aromatic and medicinal herbs, of which the state has 
several hundred distinct species, have been^ obtained in larger 
quantities than from any other state in the Union. 

Fauna. — In North Carolina five of the seven life-zones into 
which North America has been divided are represented, but more of 
its area belongs to the upper-austral than to any other zone. The 
speciesof fauna that are at all characteristic of this part of the United 
States are found in the Piedmont Plateau Region and the western 
portion of the Coastal Plain Region. Among the song-birds are the 
mocking-bird, the Carolina wren and the cardinal grosbeak (orred 
bird) ; there are plenty of quail or " bob white " (called partridge 
in the South). Among the mammals are the opossum, raccoon, 
star-nosed mole (Condyluracri$tata)jjpey fox and fox squirrel. 
The mammals of the Mountain Region include the cotton-tail rabbit, 
red squirrel, lynx and woodchuck ; ^ and there is a considerable 
variety of migratory song-birds, which are common to the more 
northern states. In the eastern portion of the Coastal Plain Region 
are the cotton rat, rice-field rat, marsh rabbit, big-eared bat, brown 
pelican, swallow-tailed kite, black vulture and some rattlesnakes 
and cotton-mouth moccasin snakes, all of which are common farther 
south; and there are some turtles and terrapins, and many geese, 
swans, ducks, and other water-fowl. Large numbers of shad, blue 
fish, weak fish (squeteague), alewives, Spanish mackerel, perch, bass, 
croakers (Mtcropogon undidatus), mullet, menhaden, oysters and 
clams are caught in the sounds, in the lower courses of the rivers 
flowing into them, or in the neighbouring waters of the sea. 

Climate. — North Carolina has a climate which varies from that of 
the S.E. corner, which approaches the sub-tropical, to that of the 
Mountain Region, which is like the medium continental type, except 
that the summers are cooler and the rainfall is greater. The mean 
annual temperature for the state (below an elevation of 4000 ft.) 
is about 59 F. For the Coastal Plain Region it is 61 ° F.; for the 
Piedmont Plateau Region, 6o° F.; for the Mountain Region, 
56 F.; for Southport, in the S.E. corner of the state, 64 F. ; 
and for Highlands, at an elevation of 3817 ft. in the S.W. corner, 
50 ° F. January, the coldest month, has a mean temperature of 
38 F. in the Mountain Region, of 41 ° F. on the Piedmont Plateau, 
and of 44 F. on the Coastal Plain; and in July, the warmest month, 
the mean is about 79 ° F. on both the Coastal Plain and the Piedmont 
Plateau and 74 F. in the Mountain Region. Extremes have ranged 
from - 19° F. at Highlands in 1899 to 107 F. at Chapel Hill, Orange 
county, in 1900 and again in 1902. The average precipitation for the 
state is about 52 in. a year, nearly all of it in the form of rain. For 
the Coastal Plain Region it is 54 in.; for the Piedmont Plateau 
Region, 48 in. ; and for the Mountain Region, 53 in. On the E. 
slope of some of the mountains the rainfall is exceeded nowhere in 
the United States, save in the N. part of the Pacific Slope. At 
Highlands, Macon county, during 1898 it was 105*24 in., and during 
1901 it was 106-17 in., 3074 in. falling here during the month oT 
August. The winds are variable and seldom violent, except along 
the coast during the sub-tropical storms of late summer and early 
autumn. 

Soil. — On the Coastal Plain the soil is generally sandy, but in nearly 
all parts of this region more or less marl abounds; south of the Neuse 
river the soil is mostly a loose sand, north of it there is more loam 
on the uplands, and in the lowlands the soil is usually compact with 
clay, silt or peat; toward the western border of the region the 
sand becomes coarser and some gravel is mixed with it. Throughout 
much of the Piedmont Plateau and Mountain regions the decom- 
position of felspar and of other aluminous minerals has resulted in a 
deep soil of clay with which more or less sand is mixed. It is deeper 
and more sandy where granite is the underlying rock, deeper and 
more fertile on the north-western than on the south-eastern mountain 
slopes, and shallower and more clayey where slate is the underlying 
rock. 

Agriculture. — Until the Civil War agriculture was about the only 
important industry in the state, and at. the close of the 19th century 
it was still the leading one; but from 1880 to 1900 the ratio of agri- 
culturists to all inhabitants of the state engaged in some gainful 
occupation decreased from 75-3 to 64*1%. The land included in 
farms amounted in 1900 to 22,745,356 acres or 73% of the total 
land surface of the state, and the percentage of farm land that was 
improved increased from 26*5 in 1870 to 36-6 in 1900. Throughout 
the colonial era the establishment of small estates was a part of the 
territorial policy of the government of North Carolina, 640 acres 
being the largest normal grant to any one person; as a consequence 
of this policy land holdings have always been much smaller here than 
in most of the other parts of the South, and since the Civil War the 
rise in the percentage of improved. land, the development of truck 
farming, and the growth in number of negro holdings* have been 
accompanied by a further decrease in the average size of farms 
from 316 acres in i860 to 101*3 acres in 1900. In the latter year 
there were in all 224,637 farms: of these 93,097 contained less than 
50 acres, 55,028 between 50 and 100 acres, 44,052 between 100 and 
175 acres, and 4224 over 500 acres. Of the total number of farms 
128,978 were operated by owners or part owners, of whom 17,434 
were coloured (including Indians); 19,916, by cash tenants, of whom 
10,331 were coloured; and 73,092 by share tenants, of whom 
26,892 were coloured. After the Civil War there have been several 
important changes in the crops raised: the development of cotton 
manufacturing in the South and the utilization 01 cotton-seed oil 
and meal gave impetus to cotton culture; and the discovery of the 
adaptability of much of the cotton land to the culture of tobacco of 
a superior quality resulted first in the development of a vast tobacco 
industry and then to a fluctuation in acreage of the crops of tobacco 
and of cotton, according as the price of either rose or fell. The 
destruction of pine forests to meet the demands for naval stores, 
and the introduction and increased use of the refrigerator car, 
resulted in much attention to the growth of garden produce for 
Northern markets. Peanut culture, introduced into the state from 
Virginia soon after the close of the Civil War, spread rapidly. In 
the meantime the crops of cereals increased little, and stock raising 
generally decreased. 

The principal crops are cotton, Indian corn, tobacco, hay, wheat, 
sweet potatoes, apples and peanuts. The yield of cotton increased 
from 62,901,790 lb in 1869 to 307,500,000 lb in 1909. In 1909 
2,898,000 acres were planted to Indian corn, with a crop of 
48,686,000 bushels; 570,000 acres to wheat, with a crop of 5,415,000 
bushels; and 196,000 acres to oats, with a crop of 3,234,000 bushels. 
In Caswell county, North Carolina, " lemon yellow tobacco was 
first produced in 1852, and the demand for this " bright " variety 
became so great that except during the interruption of the Civil War 
its culture spread rapidly. In 1879 the state's crop amounted to 
26,986,213 ft), in 1889 to 36,375,258 ft), in 1899 to 127,503,400 lb, 
and in 1909 to 144,000,000 lb. The hay and forage crop increased 
from 80,528 tons in 1879 to 246,820 tons in 1899; and in 1909 the 
hay crop was 242,000 tons. In the production of vegetables and 
fruits the state ranks high. Potatoes, cabbage and lettuce are much 
grown for the early Northern markets. 

Farmers of the Piedmont Plateau formerly kept large numbers 
of horses and cattle from April to November in ranges in the Moun- 
tain Region, but with the opening of portions of that country to 
cultivation the business of pasturage declined, except as the cotton 
plantations demanded an increased supply of mules; there were 
25,259 mules in 1850,110,011 in 1890, 138,786 in I900,and 181,000 in 
19 10. The number of horses was 192,000 in 1910; of dairy cows, 
297,000; of hogs, 1,356,000; and of sheep, 215,000. 

Cotton is grown most largely in the S. portion of the Piedmont 
Plateau and in a few counties along or near the W. border of the 
Coastal Plain; tobacco, in the N. portion of the Piedmont Plateau 
and in the central and N.W. portions of the Coastal Plain; rice, 
along the banks of rivers near the coast; wheat, in the valley of 
the Yadkin; orchard fruits, in the W. portion of the Piedmont 
Plateau and in the Mountain Region; vegetables and small 
fruits in the middle and S. portion of the Coastal Plain; peanuts, 
in the N. portion of the Coastal Plain; sorghum cane, almost wholly 
in Columbus county in the S. part of the Coastal Plain. The state 
government, through its Department of Agriculture, takes an active 
interest in the introduction of modern agricultural methods, and in 
the promotion of diversified farming; in 1899 it established the 
Edgecombe and in i£02 the Iredell test farm. 

Forests. — North Carolina had in 1900 about 35,300 sq. m. of 
woodland; great quantities of merchantable timber still remained, 
especially in the Mountain Region and on the Coastal Plain. The 
trees of the greatest commercial value are oak and chestnut at the 
foot of the mountains and yellow pine on the uplands of the Coastal 
Plain. But mixed with the oak and chestnut or higher up are 
considerable hickory, bfrch and maple; farther up the mountain 
sides are some hemlock and white pine; and on the swamp lands of 
the Coastal Plain are much cypress and some cedar, and on the 
Coastal Plain south of the Neuse there is much long-leaf pine from 
which resin is obtained. Several other pines are found, and among 
the less important timber trees are black spruce, Carolina balsam, 
beeches, ashes, sycamore or button wood, sweet gum and lindens. 
The value of the lumber and timber products was $1,074,003 in i860; 
$5*898,742 in 1890; $14,862,593 in 1900; and $15,731,379 in 1905. 

Fisheries. — In the sounds along the coast, in the lower courses 
of the rivers that flow into them, and along the outer shores fishing 
is an important industry. The fisheries are chiefly of shad, oysters, 
mullet, alewives, clams, black bass, menhaden, croakers and blue- 
fish. In 1908 the catch was valued at about $1,750,000. The State 
Geological and Economic Survey has made a careful study of the 
fishes of North Carolina, of the shad fisheries, of oyster culture, and of 
the development of terrapin. At Beaufort the United States Bureau 
of Fisheries has a marine biological laboratory, established in 1901 
for the study of the aquatic fauna of the south-east coast. 

Minerals. — At the beginning of the 20th century a great number 
of minerals were found in the Piedmont Plateau and Mountain 
regions, but most of them in such small quantities as to be of little 
or no commercial value, and in 1902 the total value of the products 
of the mines and quarries was only $927,376; but in 1907 their 
value was $2,961,381, and in 1908, $2,145,947. During the first 
half of the 19th century North Carolina was a mining state of 
the first importance; in 1804 it was the only state in the United 
States from which gold was obtained. Operations ceased during 
the Civil War. and although resumed soon after its close, they 
became somewhat desultory. Probably the earliest large find was 
a 17-ft) nugget on the Reed Plantation in Cabarrus county in 1799; 
in the same .mine a 2 8- ft) nugget, probably the largest found in 
eastern United States, was discovered in 1803. The production in 
Rutherford and^ Burke counties and their vicinity was so great, 
and transportation to the United States Mint at Philadelphia so 
difficult, that from 1 83 1 to 1857 gold was privately coined in I, 2 J 
and 5 dollar pieces bearing the mark of the coiner " C. Bechtler, 
Rutherford county, N.C." The coins were of standard purity (or 
higher); they are now very rare. A branch mint of the United 
States was established in 1837 at Charlotte. Silver, which is rarer 
in the state than gold, is found chiefly in the W. portion of the 
Piedmont Plateau. In 1902 the value of the gold and silver product 
combined was $71,287, and in 1908, when the Iola mine 6 m. E. of 
Troy, Montgomery county, was the most productive, the value of 
the gold alone was $97,945, that of the silver $668, and that of 
copper, $2560. 

In 1870 North Carolina's mica*mines were reopened, and they 
produce the best grade of sheet mica for glazing and a large per- 
centage of the country's yield of this mineral. Most of it has been 
found in the N.E. portion of the Mountain Region; and that mica 
was mined here before any European settlement of the country 
seems proved by numerous excavations and by huge heaps on 
which are large oak and chestnut trees, some fallen and decayed. 
North Carolina is also the leading state in the Union in the production 
of monazite. The mining of corundum was begun at Corundum 
Hill in Macon county in 1871, and from 1880 to 1902 the output 
was considerable, but with the discovery of the Canadian corundum 
deposits the importance of those of North Carolina greatly declined. 
It was along the coast of North Carolina that Europeans in 1585 
made the first discovery of iron ore within the present limits of the 
United States. Iron ores are widely distributed within the state, 
and there have been times since the eve of the War of Independence 
when the mining of it was an industry of relatively great importance. 
In 1908 the product amounted to 48,522 long tons (all magnetite), 
and was valued at $76,877; almost the entire product is from the 
Cranberry mines^ near Cranberry, Mitchell county. The state has 
two small areas in which bituminous coal occurs; one in the basin 
of the Dan and one in the basin of the Deep. Very little coal was 
produced in the state until the Civil War, when, in 1862 and again 
in 1863, 30,000 short tons were obtained for the relief of the Con- 
federate government, an amount which up to 1905, when the yield 
was only 1557 short tons (falling off from 7000 short tons in 1904), 
had not since been equalled; in 1906, in 1907 and in 1908 no coal 
was mined in the state. The most valuable immediate product of 
the state's mines and quarries for nearly every year from 1890 to 
1908 was building stones of granite and gneiss, which are found in all 
parts of the state west of the "Fall Line"; the best grades of 
granite are quarried chiefly in Gaston, Iredell, Rowan, Surry and 
Wilkes counties. The value of the building stone increased from 
$150,000 in 1892 to $800,177 (of which $764,272 was the value of 
granite) in 1908. Talc ajso is widely distributed in the state; the 
most extensive beds are in the south-western counties, Swain and 
Cherokee. 

Manufactures. — During the quarter of a century between 1880 
and 1005 a great change was wrought in the industrial life of the 
state by a phenomenal growth of cotton manufacturing. A cotton 
mill was erected in Lincoln county about 1813, and by 1840 about 
25 small mills were in operation within the state. When the Civil 
War was over, the abnormally high price of cotton made cotton 
raising for more than a decade a great assistance to the people in 
recovering from ruin, but when the price had steadily declined from 
23-98 cents a pound in 1870 to 10-38 cents a pound in 1879, they 
turned to the erection and operation of cotton mills. In 1880 the 
total value of the manufactured products of thestate was$20,095,037 ; 
in 1900 the value of the cotton manufactures alone was $28,372,789, 
and in 1905 $47i 2 54»054- The rapid extension of tobacco culture 
was accompanied py a corresponding growth in the manufacture of 
chewing and smokingtobacco andsnuff, andsome of the brands have 
a wide reputation. The product increased in value from $4,783,484 
in 1890 to $25,488,721 in 1905. In 1890 the lumber and timber 
products, valued at $5,898,742, ranked second among the state's 
manufactures; by 1905 their value had increased to $15,731,379. 
The value of the state s factory product for 1900 was $85,274,083, 
and that for 1905, $142,520,776, an advance of 67-1 %. The cotton 
mills are mostly in the Piedmont Plateau Region; Durham, Durham 
county, and Winston. Forsyth county, are leading centres of tobacco 
manufacture; and High Point (pop. in 1900, 4163) in Randolph 
is noted for its manufacture of furniture. 

Transportation. — Railway building was begun in the state in T836 
with the Raleigh & Gastcn line, opened from Raleigh to Gaston in 
1844 and extended to Weldon in 1852. A longer line, that from 
Wilmington to Weldon, was completed in 1840. But the greatest 
period of building was from 1880 to 1890; during this decade the 
mileage was increased from i486 m. to 3128 m., or 1642 m., which 
was more than one-third of all that had been built up to the year 
1909, when the total mileage was 4464-14. The principal systems of 
railways are the Southern, the Atlantic Coast Line, the Norfolk & 
Southern and the Seaboard Air Line. By means of its navigable 
waters and safe harbours the state has an extensive coasting trade. 
The harbours along the sounds and in the estuaries of the rivers 
are well protected from the storms of the ocean by the long chain 
of narrow islands in front, but navigation by the largest vessels is 
interrupted by shoals in the sounds, and especially by bars crossing 
the inlets between islands. The channel leading to the harbour of 
Wilmington has been cleared to a depth of 20 ft. or more by dredging 
and by the construction of jetties and an immense dam, works which 
were begun by the state in 1823 but from 1828 were carried on from 
time to time by the national government. The Roanoke river is 
navigable to Weldon and the Cape Fear river to Fayetteville ; the 
Neuse is navigable for small vessels only to Newbern. 

Population. — The population l of North Carolina increased from 
I >399>75° in 1880 to 1,617,949 m 1890, or 15-6%; to 1,893,810 in 
1900, a further increase of 17-1%; and to 2,206,287 in 1910, an 
increase of 16-5% since 1900. Of the total in 1900 only 4492, 
or less than \ of 1 % were foreign-born, nearly half of these 
being natives of Germany and England, 1,263,664 were whites, 
624,469 negroes, 5687 Indians and 51 Chinese. Nearly one- 
fourth of the Indians are Cherokees, who occupy, for the most 
part, the Qualla Reservation in Swain and Jackson counties, 
not iar from the south-western extremity of the state. The others, 

	! The population of the state was 393,751 in 1790; 478,103 in 
	1800; 555,500 in 1810; 638,829 in 1820; 737.987 in 1830; 75.M19 in 
	1840; 869,039 in 1850; 992,622 in i860; and 1,071,361 in 1870. 

numbering in 1007 nearly 5000, living mostly in- Robeson 
county, are of mixed breed and have been named the Croatans, 
on the assumption (probahly baseless) that they are the descend- 
ants of John White's lost colony of 1587. The Cherokees have 
no ambition to accumulate property, but both they and the 
Croatans have been generally peaceable and many of them send 
their children to school — for the Croatans the state provides 
separate schools. The Baptist and Methodist churches are the 
leading religious denominations in the state; but there are also 
Presbyterians, Lutherans, members of the Christian Connexion 
(O'Kcllyites), Disciples of Christ (Campbellites) Episcopalians, 
Friends, Roman Catholics, Moravians and members of other 
denominations. Until nearly a century after the founding of 
the Carolinas there was not a town in North Carolina that had 
a population of 1000, and the urban population of the state was 
exceptionally small at the beginning of the rapid rise of the 
manufacturing industries about 1880. In 1900 the urban 
population (in places having 4000 inhabitants or more) was 
152,019, or 8% of the total; the semi-urban (in incorporated 
places having less than 4000 inhabitants) was 186,258 or 9*8% 
of the total; and the rural (outside of incorporated places) 
was 1,555,533 or 82-1% of the total. But between 1890 and 
1900 the urban population increased 56-6% and the semi- 
urban 6i*6%, while the rural increased only io-6%. The 
principal cities are Wilmington, Charlotte, Asheville, Raleigh 
(the capital), Greensboro, Winston and Newbern. 

Administration. — North Carolina has been governed under the 
charters of 1663 and 1665 (1663-1729), under commissions and 
instructions from the crown (1 720-1776), and under the state 
constitutions of the 18th of December 1776 (amended in 1835, 
in 1856, and in the Secession Convention of 1861) and of April 
1868 (amended in 1872-1873, 1875, 2 1879, 1888 and 1899). 
The present constitution, as amended, prescribes that no con- 
vention of the people of the state may be called by the legis- 
lature unless by the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members 
of each house followed by an affirmative vote of a majority of 
the electors voting on the question; and that an amendment to 
the constitution may be adopted only by a three-fifths vote of 
each house followed by an affirmative vote of the majority of 
electors voting on the question. The suffrage provisions con- 
taining the famous " grandfather clause " (in Art vi. section 4), 
were adopted in the form of a constitutional amendment, ratified 
in August 1900, and in effect on the 1st day of July 1902. *AU 
persons otherwise qualified may place their names on the voting 
register, provided they can read and write any section of the 
constitution in the English language and have paid on or before 
the 1 st of May the poll tax for the previous year. An exception 
to the educational requirement is made in favour of any male 
person who was, on the 1st day of January 1867, or at any time 
prior thereto, entitled to vote under the laws of any state in 
the United States wherein he then resided, and in favour of 
lineal descendants of such persons. This exception remained 
in force until the 1st of December 1908, after which time all 
who were on the list became (unless disqualified because con- 
victed of felony) life voters, but new applicants had to stand the 
educational test. 

Perhaps the most notable feature about the administration 
is the weakness of the governor's position. He is elected by 
popular vote 3 for four years, and cannot succeed himself in 
office. His power is limited by a council of state, a relic of 
colonial days. This body is not, however, a special board, as 
in Maine, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts, but a kind of 
administrative cabinet as in Iowa, consisting of the secretary 
of state, the auditor, the treasurer, and the superintendent of 

	*The changes made in 1875 were adopted in a convention, were 
	ratified in 1876, and were so numerous that the amended constitution 
	is frequently referred to as the Constitution of 1876. 

	* Up to 1835 he was elected annually by the two houses of the 
	legislature, and no man could serve as governor for more than three 
	years in any six successive years. Under an amendment of 1835 
	he was elected for two years by popular vote of electors for members 
	of the House of Commons, and no man was eligible to serve for more 
	than four years in any term of six years. 

public instruction, and advising the governor in the administra- 
tion of his office. Judges, heads of departments, and executive 
boards are elected, and even in the few instances in which the 
governor appoints to office the confirmation of the Senate is 
necessary. Furthermore, in North Carolina the governor has 
no veto power. In addition to the executive officials mentioned 
above there are a lieutenant-governor, an attorney-general, a 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, established in 1887, and a Corporation 
Commission, which in 1899 superseded the Railroad Commission, 
established in 1891. The governor and the lieutenant-governor 
must at the time of their election be at least thirty years of age, 
and must have been citizens of the United States for five years 
and residents of the state for two years. 

Sessions of the General Assembly are held biennially, beginning 
on the Wednesday after the first Monday in January. The Senate 
is composed of fifty members elected biennially by senatorial 
districts as nearly as possible equal to one another in population, 
and the House of Representatives (in the Constitution of 1776 
called the House of Commons) of one hundred and twenty, 
elected biennially and chosen by counties 1 according to their 
population, each county having at least one representative, no 
matter how small its population. A senator must at the time of 
his election be at least 25 years of age, and must have been a 
resident and citizen of the state for at least two years, and a 
resident in his district for one year immediately preceding his 
election; and a representative must be a qualified elector of 
the state and must have resided in his county for at least one 
year immediately preceding his election. The pay for both 
senators and representatives is four dollars per day for a period 
not exceeding sixty days; should the session be prolonged the 
extra service is without compensation. Extra sessions, called 
by the governor on the advice of the council of state, are limited 
to twenty days, but may be extended under the same limitations 
in regard to compensation. The Senate may sit as a court of 
impeachment to try cases presented by the House, and a two- 
thirds vote is necessary for conviction. 

There is a supreme court consisting of a chief justice and four 
associates, elected by popular vote for eight years, and a superior 
or circuit court, composed of sixteen judges elected by the people 
in each of sixteen districts for a term of eight years. 

The county officials are the sheriff, a coroner, a treasurer, a 
register of deeds, a surveyor and five commissioners, elected for 
two years. The commissioners supervise the penal and charitable 
institutions, schools, roads, bridges and finances of the county. 
Subordinate to them are the township boards of trustees, 
composed of a clerk, and two justices of the peace. 

By the constitution personal property to the value of $500 and 
any homestead to the value of $1000 is exempt from sale for debt, 
except for taxes on the homestead, or for obligations contracted for 
the purchase of said premises. Under the revised code (1905) a wife 
may hold property which she had acquired before marriage free 
from any obligation of her husband, but in general she is not per- 
mitted to make contracts affecting either her personal^ or real estate 
without the written consent of her husband. Neither can the 
husband convey real estate without the wife's consent, and a widow 
may dissent from her husband's will at any time within six months 
after the probate of the same, the effect of such dissent being to 
allow her the right of one-third of her deceased husband's property, 
including the dwelling house in which they usually resided. The 
constitution prescribes that " all marriages between a white person 
and a negro, or between a white person and a white person of negro 
descent to the third generation inclusive, are hereby forever pro- 
hibited." Until 1905 the only grounds for an absolute divorce were 

	1 Under the Constitution of 1776 senators were elected by counties, 
	one for each county, and representatives also by counties, two for 
	each county — in addition, the towns of Edenton, Newbern, Wil- 
	mington, Salisbury, Hillsboro and Halifax each elected one repre- 
	sentative; and a property qualification — a freehold of 50 acres 
	held for six months before an election — was imposed on electors 
	of senators. Under amendments of 1835 senators were chosen by 
	districts formed on the basis of public taxes paid into the state 
	treasury, representatives were still chosen by counties, and were 
	apportioned among them on the same basis as their Federal repre- 
	sentation (i.e. counting three-fifths of the slaves), and free negroes or 
	mulattoes " descended from negro ancestors to the fourth generation 
	inclusive " were excluded from the suffrage. In 1856 the property 
	qualification for electors of senators was removed. 

adultery, natural impotence, and pregnancy of the wife at the time 
of marriage; but an amendment of 1907 allows a divorce whenever 
there has been a separation of husband and wife for ten successive 
years, provided the parties have lived in the state for that period 
and no children have been born of the marriage. The working of 
children under twelve years of age in any factory or manufacturing 
establishment is unlawful, the working of children between the 
ages of twelve and thirteen in such places is allowed only on condition 
that they be employed as apprentices and have attended school for 
at least four months during the preceding year; and no boy or girl 
under fourteen is to work in such places during night time. An anti- 
trust law of 1907 makes it unlawful for any corporation controlling 
within the state the sale of 50% of an article to raise or lower the 
price of that article with the intention of injuring a competitor. 
On the 26th of May 1908 the people of the state voted " against 
the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors" in the state; 
the prohibition act thus approved went into effect on the 1st of 
January 1909. State prohibition had been defeated ^188^ by a 
vote of 100,000; in 1902 the Anti-Saloon League organized in the 
state; in 1903 the Watts Law enacted rural prohibition, giving towns 
local option, under which many of the towns voted " no licence "; 
and in 1905 severe police regulations were provided for towns in 
which saloons were licensed. 

Charitable and Penal Institutions. — In the systematic care of the 
dependent and defective classes North Carolina was one of the 
pioneer states of the South. An institute for the deaf and dumb 
and blind was opened at Raleigh in 1845, and another for the deaf 
and dumb at Morganton in 1894; by a law of 1907 every deaf child 
of sound mind must attend, between the ages of eight and fifteen, 
a school for the deaf at least five terms of nine months each; and 
by a iaw of 1908 every blind child (between seven and seventeen), 
if of sound mind and body, must attend some school for the blind 
for nine months of each year. The North Carolina State Hospital 
(for the insane) at Raleigh was opened in 1856 as a result of the 
labours of Miss Dorothea Lynde Dix (1805-1887); in connexion 
with it there is an epileptic colony. The State Hospital at Morgan- 
ton, opened in 1883, completed in 1886, and intended for the use 
of the western part of the state, is perhaps the best equipped institu- 
tion of its kind south of the Potomac. In 1901 a department for 
criminal insane was opened in a wing of the state prison at Raleigh. 
The Oxford Orphan Asylum at Oxford (1872) is supported partly 
by the Masonic Order and partly by the state. A movement begun 
by the Confederate Veterans Association in October 1889 resulted 
in the establishment in 1890 of a home for disabled veterans at 
Raleigh; this became a state institution in 1891. In 1908 a state 
tuberculosis sanatorium was opened near Aberdeen, Moore county. 
The state also takes good care of the unfortunates among the negro 
race. The Institute for the Colored Deaf, Dumb and Blind (1867) 
at Raleigh and the Eastern Insane Hospital (1880) near Goldsboro 
are the oldest institutions of the kind for negroes in the world ; 
in connexion with the last there is an epileptic colony for negroes. 
There is also (at Oxford) an Orphanage for the Colored (1883), which 
was established by the '* Wake and Shiloh Associations of the Colored 
Baptist Church," first received state aid in 1891, and is now supported 
chiefly by the state. The state prison is at Raleigh, although most 
of the convicts are distributed upon farms owned and operated by 
the state. The lease system does not prevail, but the farming out of 
convict labour is permitted by the constitution; such labour is 
used chiefly for the building of railways, the convicts so employed 
being at all times cared for and guarded by state officials. A re- 
formatory for white youth between the ages of seven and sixteen, 
under the name of the Stonewall Jackson Manual Training and 
Industrial School, was opened at Concord in 1909, and in March 
1909 the Foulk Reformatory and Manual Training School for negro 
youth was provided for. Charitable and penal institutions are under 
the supervision of a Board of Public Charities, appointed by the 
governor for a period of six years, the terms of the different members 
expiring in different years. Private institutions for the care of the 
insane, idiots, feeble-minded and inebriates may be established, 
but must be licensed and regulated by the state board and become 
legally a part of the system of public charities. 

Education. — The public school system was established in 1839, 
being based on the programme for state education prepared in 1816- 
1817 by Archibald Debow Murphey (1777-1832), whose educational 
ideas were far in advance of his day. Calvin Henderson Wiley 
(18 19-1887), the author of several romances dealing with life in 
North Carolina, such as Roanoke: or, Where is Utopia? £1866), 
and of Life in the South: a Companion to Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852), 
was superintendent of common schools in 1 853-1 865 (the executive 
head of the state's educational department having previously been a 
41 literary board "), and won the name of the " Horace Mann of the 
South " by his wise reforms. He kept the public schools going 
through the Civil War, having advised against the disturbance of the 
school- funds and their reinvestment in Confederate securities. The 
present school system is supervised by a state board of education 
consisting of the governor, lieutenant-governor, secretary of state, 
treasurer, auditor, attorney-general, and superintendent of public 
instruction. In the counties there is a board of education and 
there is also a local school committee of three in each township. 
The compulsory attendance at school of children between the ages 
of eight and fourteen for sixteen weeks each year by a state law is 
optional with each county. A state library commission was estab- 
lished in 1909. 

At the head of the state system of education is the university of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, chartered in 1789 and opened in 
1795* one °* the oWcst state universities in the country and one of the 
oldest universities in the South; it consists of the college, the 
graduate department, the law department, the department of 
medicine (1890, part of whose work is done at Raleigh) and the 
department of pharmacy (1897). In 1907-1908 it had 75 instructors 
and 775 students. Other state educational institutions are the 
College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts (1889) at West Raleigh, 
which in 1907-1908 had 42 instructors and 436 students; the State 
Normal and Industrial College (1892) for women, at Greensboro; 
and the East Carolina Teachers' Training School (1907), at Greenville. 
For the higher education of the negroes the state supports an Agri- 
cultural and Mechanical College (1 891 ) at Greensboro, and normal and 
industrial schools at Fayetteville, Elizabeth City and Winston. The 
more important sectarian schools are Wake Forest College (Baptist, 
opened 1 834 as a " manual labour and classical institute "; asa college, 
1838) at Wake Forest, 16 m. north of Raleigh, with 371 students 
in 1907-1908; Davidson College (Presbyterian, 1837) at Davidson, 
with 308 students (1907-1908); Biddle University (Presbyterian) 
at Charlotte, for negroes; Greensboro Female College (Methodist 
Episcopal, South; 1846); Guilford College (coeducational; Society 
of Friends, 1837) near Greensboro; Trinity College (coeducational; 
Methodist, -1852) at Durham; Lenoir College (Lutheran, 1890) at 
Hickory; Catawba College (Reformed, 1851) at Newton; Weaver- 
ville College (Methodist Episcopal, 1873) at Weaverville; Elon 
College (Christian, 1 890) at Elon ; St Mary's College (Roman Catholic, 
1877), under the charge of Benedictines, at Belmont; Shaw Uni- 
versity (Baptist, 1865), for negroes, at Raleigh; and Livingston 
College (Methodist, 1879), for negroes, at Salisbury. 

Finance. — The revenues of the state come from two sources; 
about two-thirds from taxation and about one-third in all from the 
earnings of the penitentiary, from the fees collected by state 
officials, from the proceeds from the sale of state publications, and 
from the dividends from stock and bonds. The state owned, in 
1909, 30,002 shares of stock in the North Carolina Railroad Company, 1 
with a market value (1907) of $5,580,372 (the stock being quoted at 
186), and an annual income of $210,014 an d 12,666 shares of stock 
in the Atlantic & North Carolina Railroad Company, from which the 
annual income is $31,665. In addition to the ordinary general 
property^ tax, licences and polls, ttiere are a tax on corporations 
and an income tax. ^ North Carolina is one of the few states to 
experiment with the inheritance tax, but the last law dealing with 
that subject was repealed in 1899. The total receipts of the general 
fund for the fiscal year 1907 were $2,603,293, and the total disburse- 
ments for the same year were $2,655,282. 

The state debt at the close of the fiscal year 1907 amounted to 
$6,880,950. It may be divided into three parts: that contracted 
between 1848 and 1861 for the construction of roads, railways and 
canals; that contracted during the Civil War for other than war 
purposes; and that contracted during the Reconstruction era, 
nominally in the form of loans to railway companies. In their im- 
poverished condition it was impossible for the people to bear the 
burden, so an act was passed in 1879 scaling part of the debt 60%, 
part of it 75% and part of it 85%. The remainder, $12,805,000, 
and all arrears of interest were repudiated outright. This of course 
impaired the obligation of a contract, but under the Eleventh Amend- 
ment to the Constitution of the United States the bondholders could 
not bring suit against the state in the Federal courts. Another state 
could do so, however, and in 1904, certain creditors having given ten 
of their bonds to South Dakota, the case of South Dakota versus 
North Carolina came before the Supreme Court. The court decided, 
four judges dissenting, that North Carolina must pay the amount due 
or suffer her railway bonds to be seized and sold to satisfy the 
judgment (192 U.S. Reports, 286. See also 108 U.S. 76). 

*The North Carolina Railroad from Goldsboro, via Raleigh, 
Greensboro and Salisbury, to Charlotte, was an extension of the 
Raleigh & Gaston, which had come into the hands of the state; it 
was chartered in 1849, the act being passed by the casting vote of the 
speaker, whose action was the cause of his failure to be re-elected 
to that, or to be elected to any other office afterwards, since the 
poverty of the state did not warrant such an expenditure. The 
original stock of $3,000,000, of which the state was to subscribe 
$2,000,000, was increased in 1855 to $4,000,000, the state subscribing 
the added million. The road was leased in 1871 to the Richmond & 
Danville for thirty years at 0%; and in 1905 to the Southern Rail- 
way Company for ninety-nine years at 6J % for the first six years 
and at 7 % for the remainder of the term. The Atlantic & North 
Carolina, the second great internal improvement undertaken. by the 
state, was chartered in 1853, and was opened from Goldsboro to 
Morehead City (95 m.) in 1858; it was in 1910 a part of the Norfolk 
& Southern system. Although the state of North Carolina owns 
70*3 % of the stock (besides this Craven county holds 77%; 
Lenoir, 2-8%; and Pamlico county, 1*13%), the state casts only 
35° votes to the 700 of the private stockholders. 

History. — The history of North Carolina may be divided into 
four main periods: the period of discovery and early colonization 
(1 520-1663); the period of proprietary rule (1663-1729); the 
period of royal rule (1729-1776); and the period of statehood 
(from 1776). 

It is possible that some of the early French and Spanish 
explorers visited the coast of North Carolina, but no serious 
attempt was made by Europeans to establish a settlement until 
near the close of the. 16th century. After receiving from Queen 
Elizabeth a patent for colonization in the New World, Sir Walter 
Raleigh, in April 1584, sent Philip Amadas, or Amidas (1550- 
1618), and Arthur Barlowe (c. 1550-c. 1620) to discover in the 
region bordering on Florida a suitable location for a colony. 
They returned in September with a glowing account of what is 
now the coast of North Carolina, and on the 9th of April 1585 
a colony of about 108 men under Ralph Lane (c. 1 530-1603) 
sailed from Plymouth in a fleet of seven small vessels commanded 
by Sir Richard Grenville. The colony was established at the 
north end of Roanoke Island on the 17th of August, and about 
a week later Grenville returned to England. Threatened with 
famine and with destruction from hostile Indians, the entire 
colony left for England on the 19th of June 1586 on Sir Francis 
Drake's fleet. Only a few days after their departure Sir Richard 
Grenville arrived with supplies and more colonists, fifteen of 
whom remained when he sailed away. Although greatly dis- 
appointed at the return of the first colony, Raleigh despatched 
another company, consisting of 121 persons under John White, 
with instructions to remove the plantation to the shore of 
Chesapeake Bay. They arrived at Roanoke Island on the 
22nd of July 1587 and were forced to remain there by the refusal 
of the sailors to carry them farther. Of the fifteen persons left by 
Grenville not one was found alive. White's grand-daughter, 
Virginia Dare (b. 18th August 1587), was the first English child 
born in America: White soon returned to England for supplies, 
and having been detained there until 1591 he found upon his* 
return no trace of the colony except the word " Croatan " 
carved on a tree; hence the colony was supposed to have gone 
away with some friendly Indians, possibly the Hatteras tribe, and 
proof of the assumption that these whites mingled with Indians 
is sought in the presence in Robeson county of a mixed people 
with Indian habits and occasional English names, calling them- 
selves Croatans. In 1629 Charles I. granted to his attorney- 
general, Sir Robert Heath, all the territory lying between the 
31st and 36th parallels and extending through from sea to sea, 
but the patent was in time vacated, and in 1663 the same 
territory was granted to the earl of Clarendon (1 600-1674), the 
duke of Albemarle (1608-1670), and six other favourites of 
Charles II. By a second charter issued in 1665 the limits were 
extended to 29 and 36 30'. 

The proprietors had all the powers of a county palatine and 
proposed to establish a feudal and aristocratic form of govern- 
ment. To this end John Locke drafted for them in 1669 the 
famous Fundamental Constitutions providing for the division 
of the province into eight counties and each county into 
seigniories, baronies, precincts and colonies, and the division of 
the land among hereditary nobles who were to grant three-fifths 
of it to their freemen and govern through an elaborate system 
of feudal courts. But these constitutions, several times revised, 
actually served only as a theoretical standard for the proprietors 
and were abrogated altogether in 1693, and the colonists were 
governed by instructions which granted them much greater 
privileges. From the very beginning the territory tended to 
divide into two distinct sections, a northern and a southern. 
The northern section was first called Albemarle, then " that part 
of our province of Carolina that lies north and east of Cape Fear," 
and about 1689 North Carolina. Settled largely by people from 
Pennsylvania, this section came to be closely associated with the 
continental colonies. The southern section, influenced by its 
location, by the early settlers from Barbados, and by its trade 
connexions, was brought into rather more intimate relations with 
the island colonies and with the mother country. The pro- 
prietors struggled in vain to bring about a closer union. In 1691 
one governor was placed over both settlements, but it was found 
necessary to appoint a deputy for North Carolina, and finally in 
1 71 2 again to allow her a governor of her own. So long as the 
intervening territory was a wilderness no effort was made to 
define the boundary line. The first steps were taken in that 
direction just after the close of the proprietary period in 1729, 
but the work was not completed until 1815. 1 

The first permanent English colony in North Carolina was 
established at Albemarle on the Chowan river about 1660 by 
people from Virginia. The colony grew rapidly, and at the close 
of the colonial period (1776) the population numbered approxi- 
mately 300,000, including English, Scotch, Scotch-Irish, Swiss, 
French Protestants, Moravians, and about 40,000 negroes. 
According to Dr Weeks " the earliest settlers . . . were not 
religious refugees, . . . they came to the province not from 
religious but economic motives." 

The proprietary period (1663-1729) was a turbulent one, in 
spite of the supposedly peaceful influence of the Quakers. 
Six out of sixteen governors or deputy-governors were driven 
from office between 1674 and 171 2, and there were two uprisings 
which have been deemed worthy of the term rebellion. The 
first under John Culpeper in 1677 was primarily economic in 
character, the chief grievance being the payment of an export 
duty on tobacco. It was evidently influenced by the recent 
uprising in Virginia under Nathaniel Bacon. The insurrection 
of dissenters (1708-1711), which was headed by Thomas Carey, 
who was deputy-governor while the trouble was brewing, was 
in opposition to the establishment of the Church of England; 
it was ultimately unsuccessful, the Church was established in 
171 1, a law was passed which deprived Quakers of the privilege 
of serving on juries or holding public office, and the establish- 
ment was continued until the War of Independence. A war with 
the Tusearora Indians, in 1711-1713, resulted in the defeat of the 
Indians and the removal of the greater part of the tribe to New 
York, where they became the sixth nation of the Iroquois 
confederacy. 

North Carolina did not join South Carolina in the revolution 
of 1 719 (see South Carolina), but remained under proprietary 
rule until 1729. In that year an act was passed by parliament 
establishing an agreement with seven of the Lords Proprietors 
for the surrender of their claims to both provinces. They were 
allowed £17,500 for their rights and £5000 for arrears of quit 
rents. Lord Carteret refused to sell and continued to hold a 
one-eighth undivided share until 1744, when he gave up his claim 
in return for a large strip of land in North Carolina lying between 
latitude 35 34' and the Virginia line (36 30'). So that while 
the king was governmental head of the whole of North Carolina 
from 1729 to 1776 he was, after 1744, territorial lord of only 
the southern half. The political history during the royal period 
is, like that of the other colonies, the story of a constant struggle 
between the representatives of the people and the representatives 
of the crown. The struggle was especially bitter during the 
administrations of the last three royal governors, Arthur Dobbs 
( 1 684-1 765), William Tryon (17 20-1 788) and Josiah Martiti 
(1737-1786). There were disputes over questions of government, 
of commerce, of finance and of religion. The ship which brought 
stamps and stamped paper to Wilmington in 1766 was not 
permitted to land, and the stampmaster was compelled by the 
people to take an oath that he would not exercise the functions 
of his office. Through the vigilance of Governor Tryon, however, 
the Assembly was prevented from sending delegates to the Stamp 
Act Congress. The colonists were also angered by the attempt to 

	1 Between 1735 and 1746 the southern boundary was first definitely 
	established by ajoint commission of North Carolina, South Carolina 
	and Georgia. The line was resurveyed in 1764, and in 1772 was 
	extended; parts of the line were resurveyed under acts of the 
	assembly of 1803, 1804, 1806, 1813, 1814 and 1815, and by an act 
	of 1810, the last extension, to the Tennessee line, was confirmed and 
	established. According to the charter the northern boundary was 
	to be the line of 36 30', but the surveys (of 1728, 1749 and 1779) 
	were not strictly accurate, and the actual line runs irregularly from 
	36° 33 r 15* a t its eastern to 36 34' 25-5" at its western end. The 
	Boundary between North Carolina and Tennessee was surveyed in 
	1799 and l8ai. 

enforce the acts of trade and navigation and by the parliamentary 
statute of 1764 forbidding the issue of bills of credit; and the 
Scotch-Irish among them in particular were aroused by the 
repeal of an act of 1771 allowing Presbyterian ministers to per- 
form the marriage ceremony and of another act of the same year 
for the establishment of Queen's College in Mecklenburg county 
for Presbyterians. In the " back country " extortionate fees, 
excessive taxes, and the oppressive manner of collecting them 
brought about a popular uprising, known as the Regulation, which 
centred in Orange and Anson counties, but was strong also in 
Brown, Edgecombe, Johnson, Granville and Halifax counties. 
Hermon Husband (c. 1724-1795) was the chief agitator of 
measures for relief, but, since, as a Quaker, he discouraged 
violence, the cause was left without a recognized leader. 
Governor Tryon manifested no sympathy for the oppressed 
and sought only the thorough suppression of the disturbance, 
which was organized in the spring of 1 768 by Regulators, " for 
regulating public grievances and abuses of power." The Regu- 
lators agreed to pay no more taxes until satisfied that they were 
in accordance with law, and to pay nothing in excess of the legal 
fees. Violence speedily followed; the local militia was called out, 
but since only a few would serve the only means found to quiet 
the people was an alleged promise from the governor that if they 
would petition him for redress and go to their homes he would 
see that justice was done. In reply to their petition the governor 
denied that he had made any promise in their behalf; and in 
September he had at his command a military force of n 53, 
about one-fourth of whom were officers. Although the Regulators 
assembled to the number of about 3700 they were not prepared to 
withstand the governor's force and again submitted without 
bloodshed, there being only a few arrests made. In the following 
year the Regulators attempted to elect new members to the 
assembly and petitioned the newly-elected house. But as little 
had been accomplished when the superior court met at Hillsboro, 
Orange county, in September 1770, the Regulators became 
desperate again, whipped the chief offender, Colonel Edmund 
Fanning, and demolished his residence. These riotous proceed- 
ings provoked the second military expedition of the governor, 
and on the 16th of May 1771, with a force of about 1000 men and 
officers, he met about twice that number of Regulators on the 
banks of the Alamance, where, after two hours of fighting, 
with losses on each side nearly equal, the ammunition of the 
Regulators was exhausted and they were routed. About 
fifteen were taken prisoners, and of these seven were executed. 
This insurrection was in no sense a beginning of the War of 
Independence; on the contrary, during that war most of Tryon's 
militia who fought at Alamance were Patriots and the majority 
of the Regulators, who remained in the province, were Loyalists. 
In August 1 77 1 Governor Tryon was succeeded by Governor 
Josiah Martin, who was soon engaged in spirited controversies 
with the assembly on questions pertaining to taxes, the southern 
boundaiy, and the attachment of property belonging to non- 
residents. So complete became the breach between them that 
in 1773 the royal government had nearly ceased to operate, and 
in 1774 the governor was deserted by his hitherto subservient 
council. The first Provincial Congress met at Newbern on the 
25th of August 1774 and elected delegates to the Continental 
Congress. When the governor learned that a second Pro- 
vincial Congress was called to meet in April 1775 he resolved to 
convene the assembly on the same day. But the assembly, 
the members of which were nearly the same as those of the 
congress, refused to interrupt the meeting of the congress, and 
in the next month the governor sought safety in flight, first to 
Fort Johnson on the Cape Fear below Wilmington and then to a 
man-of-war along the coast. On the 31st of May 1775 a com- 
mittee representing the militia companies of Mecklenburg 
county passed a series of resolutions which declared that the 
royal commissions in the several colonies were null and void, 
that the constitution of each colony was wholly suspended, and 
that the legislative and executive powers of each colony were 
vested in its provincial congress subject to the direction of the 
Continental Congress; and the resolutions requested the 
inhabitants of the county to form a military and civil organiza- 
tion independent of the crown of Great Britain which should 
operate until the Provincial Congress should otherwise provide 
or the British parliament should " resign its unjust and arbitrary 
pretensions with respect to America." The " Mecklenburg 
Declaration," which it is alleged was passed on the 20th of the 
same month by the same committee, " dissolves the political 
bonds " which have connected the county with the mother 
country, " absolves " the citizens of that county " from all 
allegiance to the British Crown," declares them " a free and 
independent people," and abounds in other phrases which closely 
resemble phrases in the great Declaration of the 4th of July 1776. 

The Resolutions were published in at least two newspapers only 
a few days after they were passed. As for the " Declaration," 
the original records of the transactions of Mecklenburg county were 
destroyed by fire in 1800, but it is claimed that a copy of the 
" Declaration " was made from memory in the same year, and when, 
in 1819, a controversy had arisen as to where the movement for 
independence originated, this copy was published, first in the Raleigh 
Register and North Carolina Gazette and then in many other news- 
papers. Several aged men also testified that they had heard a 
declaration of independence read at Charlotte, the counts-seat, in 
May 1775; and one of them stated that he had carried it to the 
Continental Congress* Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, however, 
declared that they had never heard of it before, and both believed 
it spurious. But Jefferson was charged with plagiarism by those 
who believed in the authenticity of the " Declaration," and in 1833 
there was discovered a proclamation of Governor Martin, dated the 
8th of August 1775, in which he mentioned a publication in the Cape 
Fear Mercury of a series of resolves by a committee of Mecklenburg 
county which declared " the entire dissolution of the laws, govern- 
ment and constitution of the country." Another stage of the 
controversy was reached in 1838-1847 when the Mecklenburg 
Resolutions of the 31st of May 1775 were discovered either in part 
or in full in newspaper files. There seems practically no basis for 
the contention that a declaration of independence was adopted on 
the 20th other than the tradition that independence was declared 
by the Mecklenburg Committee on that date, and the occasional 
references in print, even before 1819, to a declaration of independence 
in the county in 1775. Those who believe the " Declaration " to be 
spurious argue that survivors remembered only one such document, 
that the Resolutions might easily be thought of as a declaration of 
independence, that Governor Martin in all probability had knowledge 
only of these and_ not^ of the alleged " Declaration," and that the 
dates of publication in the Raleigh and Charleston newspaper, 
and the politics of those papers, show that the Resolutions are 
authentic. In July 1905 there" appeared in Collier's Weekly (New 
York) what purported to be a facsimile reproduction of a copy of the 
Cafe Fear Mercury which was referred to by Governor Martin and 
which contained the " Declaration "; but this was proved a forgery. 1 

The first and the second provincial congress did little except 
choose delegates to the Continental Congress and the manage- 
ment of affairs passed in large measure from the royal govern- 
ment to the several county committees. The third provincial 
congress, which met on the 21st of August 1775, still required 
its members to sign an oath of allegiance to King George III. 
but formed a provisional government consisting of a provincial 
council and six District Committees of Safety. The first sanction 
of independence by any body representing the whole province 
was given by the fourth Provincial Congress on the 12th of April 
1776, and the same body immediately proceeded to the con- 
sideration of a new and permanent form of government. Their 
labours ended, however, in another provincial government 
by a Council of Safety, and the drafting of North Carolina's 
first state constitution was left to a constitutional convention 
which assembled at Halifax on the 12th of November. 

North Carolinians fought under Washington at Brandywine 
and Monmouth and played a still more important part in the 
Southern campaigns of 1 778-1781. The state was twice invaded, 
in 1776 and in 1 780-1 781, and two important battles were fought 
upon her soil, Moore's Creek on the 27th of February 1776 and 
Guilford Court House on the 15th of March 1781. 

The territory now comprising the state of Tennessee belonged 
to Carolina under the charters of 1663 and 1665, and fell to North 
Carolina when the original province was divided." To this 

	1 The 20th of May has been made a holiday in North Carolina, 
	and the date appears en the state frag and the state seal; and a 
	statue has been erected at Charlotte in memory of the signers of the 
	" Declaration." 

territory settlers, many of them from North Carolina, had gone 
immediately before and during the War of Independence, and 
had organized a practically independent government. In 1776 
this was formally annexed to North Carolina, but in 1784 the 
state ceded this district to the national government on condition 
that it should be accepted within two years. The inhabitants of 
the district, however, objected to the cession, especially to the 
terms, which, they contended, threatened them with two years 
of anarchy; declared their independence of North Carolina and 
organized for themselves the state of Franklin. But the new 
state was weakened by factions, and after a brief and precarious 
existence it was forced into submission to North Carolina by which 
in 1790 the territory was again ceded to the national government 
with the proviso that no regulation made or to be made by Con- 
gress should tend to the emancipation of slaves (see Tennessee). 

North Carolina sent delegates to the Philadelphia Constitu- 
tional Convention of 1787, but the state convention, at Hillsboro, 
called to pass upon the constitution for North Carolina, did not 
meet until the 21st of July 1788, when ten states had already 
ratified. On the first day of this convention the opponents to the 
constitution, among whom were most of the delegates from the 
western counties, were ready to reject it without debate, but 
yielded to a proposal for discussing it clause by clause. In this 
discussion, which was continued for nine days, the document was 
most strongly opposed because it contained no bill of rights and on 
the ground that it would provide for such a strong central govern- 
ment that the state governments would ultimately be sacrificed. 
At the conclusion of the debate the convention by a vote of 
184 to 84 declared itself unwilling to ratify the constitution until 
a bill of rights had been added and it had been amended in 
several other particulars so as to guarantee certain powers to the 
states. By reason of this rejection the relations of North Carolina 
with the other states were severed upon the dissolution of the 
Confederation, and it took no part in the first election or in the 
organization of the new government. However, there was a 
speedy reaction against the oppositon which had in no small 
measure been inspired by fear of a requirement that debts be 
paid in gold and silver. A second convention met at Fayetteville 
in November 1789 and the constitution was speedily ratified 
(on the 13th) by a vote of 195 to 77. 

The period from 1790 to 1835 was marked by a prolonged 
contest between the eastern and the western counties. When 
the state constitution of 1776 was adopted the counties were so 
nearly equal in population that they were given equal representa- 
tion in the General Assembly, but the equality in population 
disappeared in the general westward movement, and in 1790 
the West began to urge a new division of the state into repre- 
sentative districts according to population and taxation. This 
was stubbornly resisted, and the West assumed a threatening 
attitude as the East opposed its projects for internal improve- 
ments for which the West had the greater need. In 1823 the 
West called an extra-legal convention to meet at Raleigh, and 
delegates from 24 of the 28 western counties responded, but 
those from the far West, in which there were practically no slaves, 
wished free white population to be made the basis of representa- 
tion, while those from the Middle West demanded the adoption 
of the basis for the national House of Representatives and the 
convention made only a divided appeal to the people. Ten 
years later, however, at the election of assemblymen, 33 of the 
western counties polled an extra-legal vote on the question of 
calling a constitutional convention, and 30,000 votes were cast 
for it to only 1000 against it. The effect of this was that in 
January 1835 the legislature passed a bill for submitting the 
question legally to all the voters of the state, although this bill 
itself limited the proposed convention's power relating to re- 
presentation by providing that it should so amend the constitu- 
tion that senators be chosen by districts according to public 
taxes, and that commoners be apportioned by districts according 
to Federal representation, i.e. five slaves to be counted equal to 
three whites. When the popular vote was taken, in the following 
April, every eastern county gave a majority against the conven- 
tion, but the West, even with the limitation which was decidedly 
favourable to the East, voted strongly for it and carried the 
election with a total majority in the state of 5856 votes. Again, 
however, the advantage was with the East, for the delegates 
were chosen by counties, two from each; but in the convention, 
which was in session at Raleigh from the 4th of June to the nth 
of July, the East made some concessions: such as the popular 
election of the governor (who had previously been elected by 
the two houses of the legislature), the disfranchisement of free 
negroes, and the abolition of representation from 6 boroughs, 
4 of which were in the East. The number of senators was 
reduced to 50, the number of commoners to 120, and the manner 
of choosing senators and commoners was changed as directed 
in the act providing for the convention. The electorate gave 
its approval to the revision by a vote of 26,771 to 21,606, and 
with this the agitation over representation ceased. 

The fundamental points of difference between North Carolina 
and South Carolina were exemplified in the slavery conflict. 
South Carolina led the extreme radical element in the South 
and was the first state to secede. North Carolina held back, 
worked for a compromise, sent delegates to the Washington 
Peace Convention in February 1861, and did jiot secede until 
the 20th of May 1861, after President Lincoln's call for troops 
to preserve the Union. Liberal support was given to the Con- 
federacy, both in men and supplies, but Governor Vance, one 
of the ablest of the Southern war governors, engaged in 
acrimonious controversies with President Jefferson Davis, 
contending that the general government of the Confederacy 
was encroaching upon the prerogatives of the separate states. 
Owing to its distance from the border, the state escaped serious 
invasion until near the close of the war. Wilmington was captured 
by the Federals in February 1865; General Sherman's army 
crossed the southern boundary in March; a battle was fought 
at Bentonville, March 10-21; Raleigh was entered on April 
13; and the Confederates under General Joseph E. Johnston 
surrendered near Durham Station, in Durham county, on the 
26th. 

Reconstruction was a costly experience here as in other 
Southern states. Jonathan Worth (1802-1860), elected governor 
under the presidential plan in 1865, was an honest and capable 
official, but the government established in accordance with the 
views of Congress in 1868 was corrupt, inefficient and tyrannical. 
Carpet-baggers, negroes and unscrupulous native whites, known 
as scalawags, were in control of affairs, while the people of 
wealth, refinement and education were disfranchised. Governor 
William Woods Holden (1818-1892; governor 1868-1870) was so 
weak and tyrannical that he was impeached by the legislature 
in December 1870. Under his successor, Tod R. Caldwell (1818- 
1874), there was some improvement in the condition of affairs, 
and in 1875 a constitutional convention, in session at Raleigh, 
with the Democrats slightly in the majority, amended the 
constitution, their work being ratified by the people at the 
state election in 1876. The native white element completely 
regained possession of the government in the following year, when 
the Democrats came into office under Governor Zebulon B. 
Vance. Since that time the most interesting feature in the 
political history has been the rise and fall of the People's party. 
The hard times which followed the financial panic of 1893 made it 
possible for them, in alliance with the Republicans, to carry 
the state in the election of 1894. Afterwards their strength 
declined, because the people became more prosperous, because 
the national Democratic party in 1896 and 1900 adopted their 
views on the money question, and because of the unpopularity 
of a coalition with Republicans, which made it necessary to give 
the coloured people a share of the offices. The race question 
was the chief issue in the election of 1898, the Democrats were 
successful, and what amounted to a negro-disfranchising amend- 
ment to the constitution was adopted in August 1900. In 1907 
there was a serious clash between the state authorities and the 
Federal judiciary, arising from an act of the legislature of that 
year which fixed the maximum railway fare at 2\ cents a 
mile and imposed enormous fines for its violation. The two 
principal railway corporations, the Southern and the Seaboard 
Air Line, contended that the act was clearly contrary to the 
14th Amendment to the Federal Constitution in that it de- 
nied the equal protection of law. The promise of the rail- 
ways to give to every purchaser of a ticket a rebate check 
until the question of the validity of the act should be decided 
by the courts was not satisfactory to the state authorities, 
who arrested a ticket agent of the Southern railway, convicted 
him of violating the law, and sentenced him to the chain-gang 
for thirty days. Thereupon the attorneys for the railway 
applied to Judge Jeter Connelly Pritchard (b. 1857) of the 
United States Circuit Court for a writ of habeas corpus; this 
was granted and the prisoner was released. The governor of 
the state, Robert Brodnax Glenn (b! 1854), nevertheless urged 
the state courts and attorneys to proceed with the prosecution 
of other ticket agents, and threatened to resist with the force 
of the state any further interference of Federal judiciary; but' 
in March 1908 the Supreme Court of the United States declared 
the North Carolina rate law unconstitutional on the ground that 
it was confiscatory. 

	Governors of North Carolina 

	Proprietary Period (1663-1729). 
	William Drummond 1 663-1 667 
	Samuel Stephens ....... 1 667-1 669 
	Peter Carteret 1669-1673 
	John Jenkins, president of the council . . 1673-1676 
	Thomas Eastchureh 1 676-1 677 
	Thomas Miller, president of the council . . 1 677-1 678 
	John Harvey, president of the council . . 1678-1679 
	John Jenkins 1679-1681 
	Henry Wilkinson 1681-1683 
	SethSothel 1 683-1 689 
	Philip Ludwell 1689-1691 
	Alexander Lillington, deputy-governor . . 1691-1694 
	Thomas Harvey, deputy-governor . . . 1 694-1 699 
	Henderson Walker, president of the council . 1 699-1 704 
	Robert Daniel, deputy-governor . . . 1 704-1 705 
	Thomas Carey, deputy-governor . . . 1705-1706 
	William Glover, president of. the council . 1706-1707 
	WinSm Skiver \ contestants (Carey's rebellion) 1707-1710 
	I7IO-I7I2 
	I7I2-I7I4 
	I 714-1722 
	1722 
	I 722-1 724 
	Edward Hyde, deputy-governor 
	Thomas Pollock, president of the council . 
	Charles Eden 
	Thomas Pollock, president of the council 
	William Reid, president of the council 
	George Burrington 1 724-1 725 
	Edward Mosely, president of the council. . 1725 
	Sir Richaid Everard 1 725-1 729 
	Royal Period (1 729-1776). 
	George Burrington 1 
	Nathaniel Rice, president of the council . 
	Gabriel Johnston 
	Nathaniel Rice, president of the council . 
	Matthew Rowan, president of the council 
	Arthur Dobbs 
	William Tryon 
	James Hasell, president of the council 
	osiah Martin 

	I73M734 
	1734 
	1 734-1 752 
	1 752-1 753 
	1 753-1 754 
	1 754-1 765 
	1765-1771 
	1771 
	1 771-1775 

	Statehood Period (1776- 
	Richard Caswell 
	Abner Nash 
	Thomas Burke 
	). 
	Alexander Martin 
	Richard Caswell . 
	Samuel Johnston . 
	Alexander Martin 
	Richard Dobbs Spaight, Sr. 
	Samuel Ashe .... 
	William Richardson Davie. 
	Benjamin Williams 
	James Turner 
	Nathaniel Alexander . 
	Benjamin Williams 
	David Stone .... 
	Benjamin Smith . 
	William Hawkins . 
	William Miller . . . 
	John Branch .... 
	Federalist 
	Dem.-Repub. 

	1777-1779 
	1779-1781 
	1781-1782 
	1 782-1 784 
	1 784-1 787 
	1 787-1 789 
	1 780-1 792 
	1791-1795 
	1 795-1 798 
	1 798-1 709 
	1 799-1 802 
	1 802- 1 805 
	1 805- 1 807 
	1 807-1 808 
	1808-1810 
	1810-1811 
	1811-1814 
	1814-1817 
	1 817-1820 

	1 Burrington was appointed in 1730, but did not arrive in the 
	province until February 1731. Either Everard held over or the 
	president of the council was acting-governor from 1 720-1 731. 

	Jesse Franklin .... 
	Gabriel Holmes .... 
	Hutchings G. Burton . 
	James Iredell . . . . 
	John Owen 
	Montford Stokes .... 
	David Lowry Swain . 
	Richard Dobbs Spaight, Jr. 
	Edward Bishop Dudley 
	John Motley Morehead 
	William Alexander Graham 
	Charles Manly . . . . 
	David Settle Reid . . 
	Warren Winslow (ex-officio) 
	Thomas Bragg .... 
	John Willis Ellis . . . 
	Henry Toole Clark (ex-officio) . 
	Zebu Ion Baird Vance . 
	William Woods Holden 
	Jonathan Worth . . 
	Gen. Daniel Edgar Sickles . 
	Gen. Ed. Richard Sprigg Canby 
	William Woods Holden 
	Tod R. Caldwell 
	Curtis Hooks B rogden . 
	Zebu Ion Baird Vance . 
	Thomas Jordan Jarvis 
	Alfred Moore Scales . 
	Daniel Gould Fowle . 
	Thomas Michael Holt . 
	Elias Carr 
	Daniel Lindsay Russell 
	Charles Brantley Aycock . 
	Robert Brodnax Glenn 
	William Walton Kitchin 

	Dem.-Repub. 1 820-1 821 
	„ 1821-1824 
	1824-1827 
	1827-1828 
	1 828-1 830 
	1 830-1 832 
	1832-1835 
	1 835-1 837 
	1837-1841 
	1841-1845 
	1845-1 849 
	1849-1 85 1 
	1851-1854 
	1854-1 855 
	1855-1859 
	1859-1 861 
	1861-1862 
	1862-1 865 
	1865 
	1865-1 867 
	1867 
	1867-1 868 
	Republican 1 868-1 870 
	1870-1 874 
	1874-1 877 
	1877-1 879 
	1879-1885 
	1885-1 889 
	1889-1891 
	1891-1893 
	1893-1 897 
	1897-1901 
	1901-1905 
	1905-1909 
	1909- 
	Democrat 
	Whig 
	Democrat 
	Provisional 
	Conservative 
	Military 
	Democrat 
	Republican 
	Democrat 

Bibliography. — For physical description, resources, industries, 
&o, see State Board of Agriculture, North Carolina and its Resources 
(Raleigh, 1896); North Carolina Geological Survey Reports (Raleigh, 
1852, sqq.); the publications of the North Carolina Geological and 
Economic Survey (Raleigh, 1893, sqq.), e.g. Water Powers in North 
Carolina (1899), by G. F. Swain, Joseph H. Holmesand E. W. Myers, 
Gold Mining in North Carolina and other Appalachian States (1897), 
by H. B. C. Nitze and A. J. Wilkins, The Tin Deposits of the Caro- 
lines (1905), by J. H. Pratt and D. B. Sterrett, Building and Orna- 
mental Stones of North Carolina (1907), by T. L. Watson and others. 
The Fishes of North Carolina (1907), by Hugh M. Smith, and 
History of the Gems found in North Carolina (1908), by G. F. Kunz; 
Report of the Secretary of Agriculture in Relation to the Forests , Rivers 
and Mountains of the Southern Appalachian Region (Washington, 
1902); Climatology of North Carolina (Raleigh, 1892); and H. 
Thompson, From the Cotton Field to the Cotton Mill, a Study of the 
Industrial Transition in North Carolina (New York, 1906), contains 
some interesting observations on the changes in social conditions 
resulting from the growth of the cotton-manufacturing industry. 
John W. Moore, History of North Carolina (2 vols., Raleigh, 1880); 
S. A 'Court Ashe, History of North Carolina (2 vols., Greensboro, 1908- 
) are general surveys. Cornelia P. Spencer, First Steps in North 
Carolina History (6th ed., Raleigh, 1893), is a brief elementary book 
written for use in the public schools. For the colonial and revolu- 
tionary periods there are some excellent studies. C. L. Raper, 
North Carolina: a Study in English Colonial Government (New York, 
1904), treats of the royal period (1729-1776) from the legal point of 
view; J. S. Bassctt, Constitutional Beginnings of North Carolina 
(Baltimore, 1894); The Regulators of North Carolina (Washington, 
1894); and Slavery in the State of North Carolina (Baltimore, 1899), 
are all trustworthy. S. B. Weeks deals with the religious history in 
his Religious Development in the Province of North Carolina (Baltimore, 
1892), Church and State in North Carolina (Baltimore, 1893) and 
Southern Quakers and Slavery (Baltimore, 1896); he is anti-Anglican, 
but judicial. E. W. Sikes, The Transition of North Carolina from 
Colony to Commonwealth (Baltimore, 1898), based on the public 
records, is accurate, though dull. There is a considerable contro- 
versial literature concerning the Mecklenburg Declaration of In- 
dependence; W. H. Hoyt's The Mecklenburg Declaration of Independ- 
ence (New York, 1907) is the best presentation of the viewgenerally 
adopted by competent historians that the alleged Declaration of the 
20th of May 1775 is spurious; G. W. Graham, The Mecklenburg 
Declaration of Independence (New York, 1905), and J. W. Moore, 
Defence of the Mecklenburg Declaration of Independence (1909), are 
perhaps the best of the attempts to prove the same Declaration 
genuine. The older histories of the colony are: Hugh Williamson, 
History of North Carolina (2 vols. Philadelphia, 1812), which deals 
with the period before 1771 and is meagre and full of errors; F. X. 
Martin, History of North Carolina (2 vols., New Orleans, 1829), 
which deals with the period before 1776, contains much irrelevant 
matter and is of little value; F. L. Hawks, History of North Carolina 
(2 vols. Fayetteville, N.C., 1 857-1858), written from' the established 
church point of view, the best and fullest treatment of the pro- 
prietary period (1663-1729); and W. D. Cooke (ed.), Revolutionary 
History of North Carolina (Raleigh and New York, 1853), containing 
a defence of the Regulators. For the Reconstruction period see J. G. 
de Roulhac Hamilton, Reconstruction in North Carolina (Raleigh, 
1906); Report of the Joint Select Committee to Inquire into the Con- 
dition of Affairs in the late Insurrectionary States, being the 42nd 
Congress, 2nd session, House Report 22 (13 vols., Washington, 1872; 
vol. ii. deals with North Carolina); and Hilary A. Herbert et al. 
Why the Solid South? or Reconstruction and its Results (Baltimore, 
1890). The chief published sources are The Colonial Records of 
North Carolina (10 vols., Raleigh, 1 886-1 890); and The State Records 
of North Carolina (vols. 11-20, 1776-1788; other vols., in continua- 
tion of the colonial series, Winston (11-15) and Goldsboro (16-20), 
1895-1902; the series is to be continued). The best bibliography 
is S. B. Weeks, Bibliography of Historical Literature of North Carolina 
(Cambridge, 1895). 


NORTHCOTE, JAMES (1746-1831), English painter, was 
born at Plymouth on the 22nd of October 1746. He was 
apprenticed to his father, a poor watchmaker of the town, and 
during his spare hours was diligent with brush and pencil. In 
1769 he left his father and started as a portrait-painter. Four 
years later he went to London and was admitted as a pupil 
into the studio and house of Reynolds. At the same time he 
attended the Academy schools. In 1775 he left Reynolds, 
and about two years later, having acquired the requisite funds 
by portrait-painting in Devonshire, he went to study in Italy. 
On his return to England, three years later, he revisited his 
native county, and then settled in London, where Opie and 
Fuseli were his rivals. He was elected associate of the Academy 
in 1786, and full academician in the following spring. The 
" Young Princes murdered in the Tower," his first important 
historical work, dates from 1786, and it was followed by the 
" Burial of the Princes in the Tower," both paintings, along with 
seven others, being executed for Boydeirs Shakespeare gallery, 
The " Death of Wat Tyler," now in the Guildhall, was exhibited 
in 1787; and shortly afterwards Northcote began a set of ten 
subjects, entitled " The Modest Girl and the Wanton," which were 
completed and engraved in 1796. Among the productions of 
Northcote's later years are the "1 Entombment " and the " Agony 
in the Garden," besides many portraits, and several animal 
subjects, like the " Leopards," the " Dog and Heron," and the 
" Lion "; these latter were more successful than the artist's efforts 
in the higher departments of art, as was indicated by Fuseli 's 
caustic remark on examining the " Angel opposing Balaam " — 
" Northcote, you are an angel at an ass, but an ass at an angel." 
The works of the artist number about two thousand, and he made 
a fortune of £40,000. He died on the 13th of July 1831. 

Northcote was emulous of fame as an author, and his first essays 
in literature were contributions to the Artist, edited by Prince Hoare. 
In 1813 he embodied his recollections of his old master in a Life of 
Reynolds. His Fables — the first series published in 1828, the second 
posthumously in 1833 — were illustrated with woodcuts by Harvey 
from Northcote's own designs. In the production of his Life of Titian, 
his last work, which appeared in 1830, he was assisted by William 
Hazlitt, who previously, in 1826, had given to the public in the 
New Monthly Magazine his recollections of Northcote's pungent and 
cynical " conversations," the bitter personalities of which caused 
much trouble to the painter and his friends. 


NORTH DAKOTA, one of the North Central states of the 
American Union, between 45 55' and 40 N., and 96 25' and 
104 3' \V\ It is bounded N. by the Canadian provinces of 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba, S. by South Dakota, W. by 
Montana and E. by Minnesota, from which it is separated by the 
Red river (or Red river of the North). North Dakota has an 
extreme length, E. and W., of 360 m., an extreme width, N. and 
S., of 210 m., and a total area of 70,837 sq. m., of which 654 
sq. m. are water surface. 

Topography. — North Dakota lies in the Prairie Plains and 
Great Plains physiographic provinces. The escarpment of the 
Coteau du Missouri is the dividing line, that portion to the N. 
and E. lying in the Prairie Plains, that to the S.W. in the Great 
Plains. The surface presents few striking topographic features, 
and may be subdivided into three vast plains or prairie table- 
lands rising one above the other from E. to W., the two eastern- 
most together constituting the Prairie Plains portion of the state. 
The lowest of these plains is the valley of the Red river, and 
this valley extends along the eastern edge of the state and 
varies in width from 25 to 70 m. Its elevation is 965 ft. at 
Wahpeton, in the extreme S.E.; 903 ft. at Fargo; 836 ft. at 
Grand Forks; and 798 ft. at Pembina, in the extreme N.E., 
which is the lowest point within the state. To the W. of this 
valley lies a second plain, ranging in height from 1200 to 1600 
ft. above sea level, and in width from 75 m. in the S. to 200 m. 
in the N. This plain is separated from the Red river valley in 
the N. by an abrupt slope rising to a height of from 300 to 500 
ft. above the surrounding country, and called the Manitoba 
escarpment, because the greater part of it lies in the province 
of Manitoba. The Pembina Mountains, low hills near the inter- 
national boundary and about 30 m. W. of the Red river, form 
a portion of this escarpment. From these hills southward the 
ridge gradually becomes less abrupt until in Walsh county 
it vanishes into prairie. The ascent to the upper plain then 
becomes very gentle, though there is a rise of 400 or 500 ft., 
until it reaches the south-eastern portion of Sargent county 
and changes into the more abrupt Coteau des Prairies, a plateau 
about 2000 ft. above the sea. The second plain, while not so 
level as the Red river valley, contains but one group of hills, 
the Turtle Mountains; these rise from 300 to 400 ft. above the 
general level, near the centre of the northern boundary. The 
prairies in this second table-land are gently rolling, and are 
covered with drift from the continental ice-sheet of the glacial 
period. They are bounded on the W. by a ridge from 300 to 
400 ft. in height and from 20 to 50 m. in width, which roughly 
marks the dividing line between the farming lands of the E. 
and the grazing lands of the W. The northern portion of this 
ridge forms the water-parting between the streams that empty 
into Hudson Bay and those that flow into the Gulf of Mexico. 
To the W. of this ridge lies the third and highest plain within the 
state, the so-called Coteau du Missouri. It occupies nearly 
one half of the state, and rises gradually westward until it attains 
a general level of about 2700 ft. East of the Missouri river 
this region is covered with glacial drift, and is noticeably different 
from the more level lands of the lower plains. The ice-sheet 
wore down from the hills and filled the valleys with debris 
until the surface has a billowy appearance. As the Missouri 
river marks approximately the lower edge of the ice-sheet, the 
region W. of this stream is almost free from glacial deposits and 
presents a strong contrast to the rest of the state. The billowy 
plains still remain in places, but in the vicinity of streams the 
billows give way to deep ravines. The sands and clays found 
here are fine and soft, and as there is scant vegetation to protect 
the hillsides they are easily eroded by the rains. As a result, 
the surface has been carved into fantastic forms. The early 
French explorers called the region les terres ?nauvaises, on account 
of the difficulties that here met the traveller, and in its English 
equivalent, " the Bad Lands," this appellation still remains. 
High winds and seams of burning lignite coal have aided the 
rains in giving the Bad Lands their peculiar configuration. 
Prairie fires or spontaneous combustion have ignited many coal 
seams. Some have already burnt out; others still emit 
smoke and sulphurous fumes from the crevices in the hillsides, 
and through the fissures may be seen the glowing coal and rock. 
The earth surface above these natural furnaces has been hardened, 
cracked and sometimes melted into a reddish slag, called scoria, 
which, on account of its resemblance to lava, has given rise to 
an incorrect impression that the region was once the centre of 
volcanic disturbances. The picturesque effect of this sculpturing 
by water, wind and fire is greatly enhanced by the brilliant 
colours along the faces of the hills and ravines — grey, yellow, 
black and every shade of red and brown. Here too are found 
petrified forests and other evidences of a vegetable growth that 
has long ago disappeared. The lands are bad for the traveller 
and the farmer, but not for the ranchman. A few miles from 
the streams the country is less broken, and there are deep grassy 
valleys, in which the animals may find shelter in winter. Cattle 
sometimes congregate in cold weather around a burning coal 
seam and enjoy the warmth. The lignite in this region also warms 
the ranchman's cabin, being easily mined where a seam is exposed 
in the walls of a ravine or on the side of a hill. 
North Dakota has a mean elevation of 1900 ft. The highest 
point in the state, about 3500 ft., is in the southern part of 
Bowman county, east of the Little Missouri river. 

Rivers. — There are three drainage systems within the state: 
the Red river (of the North) and its tributaries, the Mouse, or 
Souris, river and its tributaries, and the Missouri river and its tribu- 
taries. The Red river flows in a winding channel along the eastern 
boundary and empties into Lake Winnipeg in Canada, thence 
reaching Hudson Bay through the Nelson river. Its tributaries 
are small, and are remarkable chiefly for the fact that they at first 
flow in a direction almost opposite to that of the main stream, and 
make a great bend to the N.E. before joining it. 1 The Sheyenne, the 
Goose, the Park and the Pembina rivers are the most important of 
these streams. The Mouse, or Souris, river rises in Canada, crosses 
the international boundary near the meridian of 102° W. long., 
flows S.E. for about 70 m., then turns to the N. and near the 101 st 
meridian re-enters British territory, after receiving the waters of the 
Riviere des Lacs and other small streams. The Missouri river, the 
most important stream within the state, crosses the western boundary 
near the 48th parallel, and after pursuing a winding course in a 
general south-easterly direction, leaves the state near the centre 
of its southern boundary. The James river, flowing southward into 
South Dakota, is the Missouri's only important eastern tributary 
within the state. From the W. the Missouri receives the waters of 
the Little Missouri, Cannon Ball, Heart and Knife rivers. All that 
portion of the state lying W. of the Pembina Mountains and E. of 
the Mouse river valley is practically without river drainage, and 
for its surface and sub-surface drainage, Devils Lake, an irregular 
body of water about 40 m. in length and with an area of 400 sq. m., 
forms a natural reservoir. The waters of this lake are strongly saline. 
The entire region W. of the Red river valley and E. of the valleys 
of the Mouse and Missouri rivers is dotted with small lakes. The 
morainic belts and other obstructions in the drift plains hem in the 
waters in the intervening basins and create what are called " glacial 
lakes," varying in diameter from a few yards to several miles. All 
the lakes of the state are of this character, and many are strong with 
salt and alkali. The drift plains also contain numerous shallow 
hollows, locally termed " pots and kettles," which receive the 
drainage of their vicinity and form sloughs. 

Fauna and Flora. — Before the advent of the white man, herds of 
bison roamed the prairies, but these have disappeared, 1 and, with 
the exception of deer and bears, large game is to be found only in 
the Bad Lands. Here are found the lynx, the " mountain lion " 
or puma, the prairie and timber wolves, the^ jack rabbit, the prairie 
dog (gopher), the black, the brown and, occasionally, the grizzly bear. 
A few fur-bearing animals, the mink, beaver and raccoon, still 
remain. The prairie dog is found everywhere. Among the lakes, 
sloughs and stubble-fields of the prairies, teal, ducks, coots and 
geese are found in abundance. Otner orairie birds are the prairie 
chicken, and there are a great many birds thatsing while flying; 
among them are the horned lark* bobolink, Smith's longspur and 
chestnut collared longspur, lark-sparrow, lark-bunting and Sprague's 
pipit. 

The flora of North Dakota is typical of a semi-arid country. 
The prevailing plant-colour is a greyish green, due to a hard dry 
outer covering which serves as a protection from desiccation. All 

Clant life has a remarkably large proportion of subterranean growth, 
ecause of the necessity of getting moisture from the earth and not 
from the air; hence roots and tubers are unusually well developed. 
The Red river valley is a meeting ground for many species of plants 
whose principal habitat lies in some other quarter. Many trees of 
the eastern forest, such as basswood, sugar, river and red maple, 
red, white and black ash, red and rock elm, black and bur oak, 
white and red pine and red cedar find their western limit here. 
Some species characteristic of the more northerly regions — for 
example, the mountain ash, balsam fir, tamarack and black and 
white spruce — find here their southern or south-western limits. 
The same is true of shrubs and herbaceous plants. The prickly 
ash, Virginian creeper and staff-tree find here their northern limit; 
and the mountain maple, Canada blueberry, dwarf birch and ground 
hemlock their southern limit. Of 1500 species of herbaceous plants 
in the Red river basin, it is estimated that fully half reach here their 
geographical limit or limit of frequent occurrence. Trees are found 

	1 The peculiar bow shape of these western tributaries of the Red 
	river is clue to the fact that these streams originally flowed S.E. into 
	Lake Agassiz, now extinct. As the waters of the lake gradually 
	receded, the rivers reached it by pushing their channels eastward 
	through what was once its bed. The southern part of the lake 
	bottom was finally uplifted by a movement of the earth crust, 
	and the outlet was changed from the S. to the N.E. The waters 
	continued to recede, and the tributaries, in cutting their way through 
	the sediment, followed the slope of the land and gradually turned 
	northward. 

	* The early settlers found the bones of the bison scattered oyer 
	the prairies, and after the construction of railways the gathering 
	and shipping of these for use in sugar refining and in the manufacture 
	of superphosphate became temporarily a profitable industry. 
	Between January and August 1889 a single dealer at Minot shipped 
	1200 tons, which sold at $8 the ton. 

	2 ^i 

only on Turtle Mountains, in the vicinity of streams, and in a few 
other places sheltered from wind and sun. North Dakota's total 
woodland area is estimated at 600 sq. m. r or less than 1 % of its 
entire surface. No other state in the Union has such a relatively 
small area of forest. By an executive proclamation, which came 
into effect on the 24th of November 1908, a Federal forest reservation 
of 21*8 sq. m. was created. The prairies of the more humid regions 
are covered with valuable grasses, and with masses of showy native 
flowers, which bloom from spring to autumn. The pasque flower is 
found on all the prairies and is the earliest to appear. The Bad Lands 
exhibit a vegetation^ typical of semi-arid regions. Cottonwoods 
flourish along the Little Missouri river, and in sheltered ravines 
grow stunted junipers and cedars, which seldom rise above the crest 
of some protecting bluff. Poplars grow in the valleys, and the cactus 
and sage brush are common. The faces of buttes and ravines that 
are turned toward the sun are usually devoid of vegetation. 

Climate. — There are no mountains, forests or large bodies of water 
to moderate the extremes of summer and winter, and the uniformity 
of topography makes the ranges of temperature for different parts 
of the state very^ nearly the same. Between the extreme northern 
and southern sections there is a range of only 6° F. The mean annual 
temperature for the state is 39 F., with an extreme of no° recorded 
for the summer and a minimum of - 54 for the winter. As a general 
rule, temperatures are highest in the VV. and lowest in the E. In 
the central region of the state (at Jamestown, Stutsman county) 
the mean annual temperature is 40 ; the mean for the winter, io°, 
with a minimum of - 40 recorded in February; the mean for the 
summer is 67 , with an extreme of 103 recorded in July. The 
winters are long and severe. The season, however, on account of the 
dryness of the climate, is not so harsh as the low temperatures 
would seem to indicate. The seasons are sharply demarked; both 
winter and summer come suddenly. The summers are short, but 
as there are sixteen hours of sunlight per day in midsummer, vege- 
tation grows rapidly. Killing frosts often occur in June and return 
again early in September. High winds are frequent, and prairie 
houses are often protected by rows of trees called "wind breaks." 
During the growing season the winds are usually light, but in the 
late summer and autumn occasional dry, hot, southerly winds (" hot 
southers ") prove very destructive to vegetation. ^ Tprnadocs are 
not unknown, and local hail storms are frequent in the summer, 
but do little damage. The total precipitation for the state is 17 or 
18 in., the heaviest, about 20 in., occurring in the Red river valley, 
and the lightest, about 14 in., in the extreme W. While the rainfall 
is always below the normal amount for humid regions, by far the 
greater part of it occurs in the spring and summer, and growing 
crops receive the full benefit. The precipitation rarely amounts to 
2 in. for the entire winter. The snows are therefore very light, and 
are quickly swept from the prairies by the high winds, so that cattle 
may graze in the open plains throughout the year. There are, 
however, during every winter from one to four severe blizzards, 
which inflict great damage upon unprotected flocks and herds. 

Soils. — As the Red river valley is the bed of the extinct Lake 
Agassiz, its soil is composed of the fine detritus and silty deposits 
carried into the lake by its tributaries. Over the whole basin this 
deposit, to a depth of 1 or 2 ft., is coloured black by decayed 
vegetation, and constitutes one of the most fertile tracts on the 
continent. Being remarkably free from trees, rocks and streams, 
the soil can be turned in furrows that run perfectly straight for 
miles, and favours the development of " bonanza farms," where 
thousands of acres are cultivated in a single field. The soils W. of 
the valley consist of glacial drift, and are well suited to the growing 
of grain. The drift becomes thinner toward the W., and finally 
disappears in the semi-arid regions of the Missouri river valley. 
In this region the soils of sand and clay are much finer than 
the drift, and are very productive where the water-supply is 
sufficient. 

Irrigation. — Irrigation is confined to the western half of the state, 
and more especially to the north-west, being employed chiefly in the 
drainage basin of the Missouri river. The bed of the river is too far 
below the surrounding country to permit the use of its waters for 
irrigation purposes by the usual gravity methods. The ordinary 
process before 1906 was to dam small streams and " coulees "(deep 
gulches in which water flows intermittently) and flood the surround- 
ing country. The total irrigated area in 1902 was 10.384 acres. The 
so-called Reclamation Act passed by Congress in 1902 provided for 
the construction of a system of irrigation works in this and other 
states by the Federal government. In 1908 the Federal Reclamation 
Service had five projects in North Dakota. ^ The Buford-Trcnton, 
Williston and Nesson projects are situated in Williams county, on 
the left bank of the Missouri river. The abundant lignite coal in 
the region was to operate pumps for raising water from the river into 
canals crossing the valley. The Washburn project was to irrigate 
5000 acres in McLean county with water pumped from the Missouri 
river. It was estimated that the fourth project, the lower Yellow- 
stone, on the western bank of the river of that name, would furnish 
water for 66,000 acres of land, of which 20,000 lie in Dawson county, 
North Dakota, and the rest in Montana. The fifth project, the 
Bowman, was to irrigate 10,000 acres in North Dakota and the north- 
western part of South Dakota by storing the waters of the North 
Fork of Grand river. Water for irrigation purposes is often derived 
from artesian wells, which are very numerous in the S. and E., 
particularly in the James river valley. 

Agriculture. — Agriculture is by far the most important industry 
of the state, and, owing to climatic conditions, it is rigidly limited 
to a few staple crops. The growing season is too short for maize 
or Indian corn, which constituted only 1-2 % of the acreage of cereals 
in 1905. No winter wheat can be grown, and the climate is too harsh 
for the larger fruits, such as apples, pears, peaches, plums and grapes; 
but such hardy small fruits as currants, gooseberries, raspberries, 
blackberries and strawberries may be grown in abundance. 

The total farm acreage in 1890 was 7,660,333; in 1900, 15,542,640. 
The value of the farm property in the same decade rose from 
$100,745,779 to $255,266,751, and the value of farm products 
from 1889 to 1899 from $21,264,938 to $64,252,494. 

The average size of the farms (excluding farms under 3 acres 
with products valued at less than $500) was 277*4 acres in 1890 and 
343*8 acres in 1900. With regard to tenure, 74*7% of the farms 
were operated by their owners, 15*2% by part owners and 7-2% 
by share tenants. Hay and grain formed the principal source of 
income of 88-a % of the farms, live-stock of 6-7 % and dairy produce 
of 2-6%. Wneat is the state's most important product. In the 
acreage of this cereal in 1909 (according to the Year-book of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture), North Dakota ranked first, and in 
the crop second among the states of the Union, its total yield being 
90,762,000 bushels, valued at $83,501,000. Next in importance to 
wheat in 1909 was flaxseed, amounting to 14,229,000 bushels, valued 
at $22,340,000. In the production of this commodity the state 
ranked first, and produced about 55% of the entire crop of the 
United States. The flax is cultivated for the seed, and only slightly 
for the fibre. Other important crops are oats ($16,368,000 in 1906) 
barley ($8,913,000), hay, potatoes, rye and Indian corn. The value 
of the various classes of live-stock on the 1st of January 1910 was as 
follows: horses, $81,168,000; mules, $1,040,000; cattle, $21,001,000; 
sheep, $2,484,000; swine, $2,266,000. Very little attention is paid 
to fruit and vegetable growing. 

Minerals. — With the exception of lignite, which underlies a large 
portion of the western half of the state, North Dakota has few mineral 
deposits of commercial value. Sandstone occurs in large quantities, 
and W. of the Red river valley granite and gneiss are found, but 
these materials are not quarried. The coal is all in the form of brown 
lignite and is not very valuable as a fuel, as it soon crumbles into a 
fine powder on being exposed to air. The total area of the coal beds 
is estimated at 35,000 sq.^m. A law enacted in 1896 required the 
use of lignite in all state buildings and institutions. Mining^ is carried 
on along the Northern Pacific railway W. of the Missouri river, in 
the Mouse river valley along the line of the Minneapolis, St Paul & 
Sault Ste Marie railway, and at a few places in tne same region 
along the line of the Great Northern railway. Good clays for the 
manufacture of tile and brick are found at numerous places. The 
total value of the mineral products (except stone) in 1909 was 
$738,818, of which $522,116 was the value of coal and $206,222 
of clay products. 

Manufactures. — Manufacturing in North Dakota is of small im- 
portance, being largely confined, with the exception of flour and grist 
milling, to the supply of local needs. Under the factory system there 
were 337 establishments in 1900 and 507 in 1905: the capital in- 
vested in 1900 was $3,511,968 and in 1905 $5,703,837; and the 
value of products was $6,259,840 in 1900 and $10,217,914 (or 
63-2% more) in 1905. The products of the flour and grist mills 
increased^ in value from $4,134,023 in 1900 to $6,463,228 in 1905, 
and in this last year constituted in value 63*3% of the total factory 
products of the state. Printing and publishing was next in import- 
ance, with products valued at $719=950 in 1900 and at $1,110,439 
in 1905. Butter, cheese and condensed milk manufactured were 
valued at $122,128 in 1900 and at $562,481 in 1905. The chief 
manufacturing centres are Fargo and Grand Forks. 

Transportation. — The total railway mileage within the state on 
the 31st of December 1908 was 4135*67 m. The main line of the 
Northern Pacific, from St Paul to Portland, Oregon, enters the state 
at Fargo and runs almost due W. throughout its length for about 
380 m. Parallel with this road, but farther to the N., is the main 
line of the Great Northern system, running from St Paul to Seattle. 
The length of its route within the state, from Wahpeton to Buford 
via Larimore, is about 460 m. Both of these systems have numerous 
branch lines. The main line of the Minneapolis, St Paul & Sault Ste 
Marie enters the S.E. corner of the state at Fairmount and ends 
in the N.VV. at Portal, on the international boundary, having in 
1909 a length within the state of 361 m. Among its many branches 
are the " Wheat Line," running from Kenmare, North Dakota, to 
Thief River Falls, Minnesota, and having a length of 251 m. in the 
state; and the " Missouri River Line, penetrating the southern 
and central portions of the state from Hankinson to Garrison, with 
a length of 282 m. In 1009 the Northern Pacific was building about 
140 m. of new track. The Chicago, Milwaukee & St Paul railway, 
running E. and W. through South Dakota, sends four short branches 
into the southern part of North Dakota. The Chicago & North- 
western also sends a short branch line northward into the state, form- 
ing a junction with other lines at Oakes. The Red river is navigable 
as far S. as Belmont, and the Missouri river is navigable throughout 
its course within the state, although it requires a skilful pilot. 

Population. — In 1870 the population of that portion of 
Dakota Territory included within the present limits of North 
Dakota was 2405; in 1880, 36,909. The population of the 
state in 1890 was 182,719; in 1900, 319,146; in 1905, 437,070; 
in 1910, 583,888. The number of the foreign-born population 
in 1900 was 113,091, or 35*4%, the highest proportion to be 
found in any state of the Union. The principal elements com- 
posing the white foreign population were as follows: Norwegians 
30,206, English Canadians 25,004, Russians 14,979, Germans 
11,546, Swedes 8419. The coloured population consisted of 
4692 Indians not taxed, 2276 Indians taxed, 286 negroes, 148 
Japanese and 32 Chinese. Most of the Indians not taxed live 
on reservations, of which there are four: Devils Lake Reserva- 
tion in 1909 had a total area of 143-97 sq. m., a population of 
980, consisting of Sisseton, Wahpeton, and Cut Head (or Pabaksa) 
Sioux; Turtle Mountain 1 Reservation, in Rolette county, 
established in 1882, and now allotted (excepting 186 acres for 
church and school purposes), had a population in 1909 of 2588, 
being for the most part a mixture of Pembina (or Turtle Mountain) 
Chippewa with French Canadians; Fort Berthold Reservation 
in the west central part of the state, on the Missouri river, 
established in 1870, had in 1909 an area of 1382-4 sq. m., and a 
population of 399 Arikara (Caddoan), and, of Siouan stock, 
453 Hidatsa (or Grosventre) and 252 Mandan Indians; and 
Standing Rock Reservation, on the western bank of the Missouri 
river, was established in 1875, an d m i9°9 contained 2887-2 
sq. m. (about three-fifths of which lies in South Dakota and 
much of which was opened to settlement in 1 908-1 909) and a 
population of 3399 Sioux. The population of the state is largely 
rural. The larger municipalities with the population of each 
in 1905 were: Fargo (12,512), Grand Forks (10,127), Jamestown 
(5093), Bismarck, the capital, (4913), Minot (4125), Valley City 
(4059), Dickinson (3188), Wahpeton (2741), Mandan (2714), 
Grafton (2423) and Devils Lake (2367); in 1905 there were fifteen 
other municipalities each with a population of more than 1000. 
In 1906 the Roman Catholic Church had the largest number of 
communicants (61,261 out of a total of 159,053 members of all 
denominations), and there were 59,923 Lutherans. 

Administration. — The state is governed under its constitution 
of 1889, as subsequently amended. The governor is chosen 
biennially, and has a limited pardoning power. He may veto 
appropriation bills by items, but any of his vetoes may be 
overruled by a two-thirds vote of each house. The governor 
and lieutenant-governor must be at least thirty years old. 
The other administrative officers are a secretary of state, 
auditor, treasurer, superintendent of public instruction, com- 
missioner of insurance, three commissioners of railways, attorney 
general and commissioner of agriculture and labour; each 
of these officers is chosen biennially and must be 'at least 
twenty-five years of age. The legislative department consists 
of a Senate, with members chosen every four years, and about 
half chosen at each biennial election; and a House of Repre- 
sentatives, with members chosen biennially. The sessions of 
the legislature are biennial, and are limited to sixty days. The 
minimum age for senators is twenty-five years and for repre- 
sentatives twenty-one years. Bills may originate in either house. 
A lieutenant-governor, chosen biennially, presides over the Senate. 
In 1907 the legislature proposed an amendment providing for 
the application of initiative and referendum to statutory laws 
and constitutional amendments; two years later the legis- 
lature passed a substitute resolution, which omits the clause 
regarding amendments of the constitution, and which, if 
passed by the legislature of 191 1 will be put to popular vote 
at the general election of 191 2. The judicial department consists 
of the supreme court, district courts, county courts, municipal 
courts, and justices of the peace. The supreme court consists 
, of three judges (minimum age thirty years), chosen by popular 
vote for six years. Their number may be increased to five 
whenever the population of the state shall amount to 600,000. 

	1 The Devils Lake Reservation and the Turtle Mountain Chippewa 
	are both under the Fort Totten School, which is on the Devils Lake 
	Reservation. 

For each judicial district (the tenth district was created in 1907) 
there is one district judge, elected for four years; the district 
courts have original jurisdiction (except in probate matters) 
and certain appellate jurisdiction. The judge of the county court 
is chosen for two years. This court has exclusive original 
jurisdiction in probate matters, and in counties with over 2000 
inhabitants its jurisdiction may be extended by popular vote 
to include concurrent jurisdiction with the district courts in 
civil matters involving amounts less than $1000, and in criminal 
actions below the grade of felony. Justices of the peace have 
jurisdiction in civil cases involving no land titles and sums of 
money not exceeding $200.- They may also try misdemeanours 
in counties without other criminal jurisdiction. 

For the administration of local government, the state is 
divided into counties (46 in 1910). In those counties that have 
not adopted a township organization county affairs are ad- 
ministered by a board of county commissioners; where the 
township organization has been adopted the county government 
is administered by the chairmen of the several township boards. 
For each county there are a judge, clerk, register of deeds, 
auditor, treasurer, sheriff and state's attorney. 

All citizens of the United States residing in North Dakota are 
declared to be citizens of the state. The right of suffrage is 
confined by the constitution to males twenty-one years of age, 
who are citizens of the United States or have declared their 
intention of becoming citizens, and who have resided in the 
state one year, in the county six months, and in the voting 
precinct ninety days preceding the election. Civilized Indians 
who have severed their tribal relations two years before an 
election are entitled to vote. Women may vote for all school 
officers and upon all questions relating solely to school matters, 
and are eligible to any school office. 

Amendments to the constitution must be passed by both 
houses of the legislature at two consecutive sessions, and must 
then be ratified by popular vote. By this arrangement a period 
of nearly four years usually elapses between the proposal and 
the final ratification of an amendment. 

The amount of homestead exempt from seizure for debt is 
limited in value to $5000, and may not include more than two 
acres in a town plot or more than 160 acres elsewhere. The 
exemption is not valid against a debt created for the purchase 
money, or against taxes levied on the property, or against 
mechanics' or labourers' liens for work done or material furnished 
for improvements, or against a mortgage acknowledged by both 
husband and wife. The grounds for absolute divorce are adultery, 
cruelty, desertion (one year) , neglect (one year) , habitual 
drunkenness (one year) and conviction for felony; residence in 
the state for one year is required before application for divorce. 

North Dakota is one of the few American states whose constitu- 
tion forbids the manufacture, importation 2 or. sale of intoxicating 
liquors. Attempts to secure the repeal of this provision have been 
unsuccessful. Apothecaries may secure a licence to sell liquors 
for purely medicinal purposes upon a petition signed by twenty- 
five reputable free-holders and twenty-five reputable women. 
In 1909 the advertisement of liquors, solicitation of orders for 
liquors, and the sale of cigarettes to minors were prohibited. 

Education. — At the head of the public school system is a super- 
intendent of public instruction, chosen for two years. He, with 
the governor and the president of the state university, constitutes 
a high -school board, having supervision of the secondary^ schools. 
In each county there is a county superintendent, elected biennially, 
and in each school district a board of directors. The proceeds of 
the sale of public lands donated to the state for educational purposes, 
and all escheats to the state, constitute a trust fund, the interest 
from which, with the proceeds of all fines for the violation of state 
laws, is annually apportioned among the school districts according 
to the school population; the total apportionment from the State 
Tuition Fund in 1908 was $357,238. This income is supplemented 
by local taxation. The minimum school term allowed by law is six 

	2 Before the law passed by the first Legislative Assembly of the state 
	to carry out this provision could come into effect, it was partially 
	annulled by the decision of the United States Supreme Court in the 
	case of Letsy v. Hardin (1890), in which thecourt held that liquors 
	might be imported into any state and sold in the original package 
	(q.v.) without reference to local prohibitory or restrictive laws. 

months, and the schools are open to all pupils between the ages of 
six and twenty-one years. For children between the ages of eight 
and fourteen attendance for twelve weeks, six being consecutive, is 
compulsory. The total enrolment in the public schools in 1908 was 
131,582, with an average daily attendance of 90,419. Educational 
facilities are also furnished by the state through university and school 
of mines at. University, near Grand Forks, normal schools (opened 
in 1890) at Valley City and Mayville, an agricultural college and 
experiment station (1890) at Fargo, a normal and industrial school 
(opened in 1859) at Ellendalc, a school for the deaf (1890) at Devils 
Lake, a scientific school (opened in 1903) at Wahpeton, and a school 
of forestry at Bottineau. Fargo College at Fargo, founded in 

»i887 by Congregationalists, is now non-sectarian. The Methodist 
Episcopal Church maintains Wesley College near Grand Forks 
(formerly the Red River Valley University at Wahpeton), affiliated 
with the state university. There is a state library commission. The 
state supports a hospital for the insane at Jamestown, an institu- 
tion for the feeble-minded at Grafton, a home for old soldiers at 
Lisbon, a blind asylum at Bathgate, a reform school (opened 1902) 
at Mandan and a penitentiary at Bismarck. There is a state sana- 
torium for tuberculosis (1909). 

Finance*— The chief source of revenue for the state, counties 
and municipalities is the general property tax. There are no special 
corporation taxes, but licence-charges are levied upon express and 
sleeping-car companies, and a tax is laid on the premiums of insurance 
companies. No poll tax is levied for state purposes, but counties 
are authorized to levy such a tax for school purposes. There are 
boards of equalization and review for the state, counties and muni- 
cipalities. The state board fixes the rate of the state tax. For 
defraying the expenses of the state government, exclusive of the 
interest on the bonded debt, the tax rate is limited by the con- 
stitution to four mills on the dollar of assessed valuation. The state 
debt, excluding the^ amount of Territorial indebtedness assumed 
when Dakota Territory was divided, may not exceed $200,000. 
Local indebtedness is limited to 5 % of the assessed value of the 
local property, but incorporated cities may by special vote increase 
this limit. The total bonded debt of the state on the 31st of October 
1908 was_ $642,300 and was incurred for the most part for the 
construction of public buildings during the Territorial period. At 
the close of the fiscal year ending on the 31st of October 1908, the 
receipts for the year amounted to $3,259,668, the expenditures to 
$3,476,073 and the balance in the treasury to $582,905. 

History. — The first attempts to establish permanent settle- 
ments in what is now North Dakota were made by traders 
of the Hudson's Bay Company, who began their operations 
in the Red river valley about 1793. 1 In 1797 C. J. B. Chaboillez, 
a French trader in the service of the North- West Fur Company, 
built a trading post on the southern bank of the Pembina river, 
near its mouth, but this was soon abandoned. Three years 
later Alexander Henry, the younger (d. 1814), built two trading 
posts in the present limits of the state for this company, one on 
the western bank of the Red river near the Park river, where 
he lived until 1808. David Thompson (1770-1857), an employee 
at different times of the Hudson's Bay and North-West Fur 
companies, explored the region of the Missouri river in 1797-1 79 8 > 
and thus anticipated the work of Lewis and Clark, who entered 
the present limits of the state in 1804 and wintered among the 
Mandans,constructingFortMandan in what is nowMcLean county. 
In 1801 John Cameron (d. 1804) erected a trading post for the 
North-West Fur Company on the site of the present Grand Forks. 

The first real homeseekers to enter the state of whom there 
is any record were a colony of Scottish Highlanders who had 
first settled at Kildonan (Winnipeg) in 18 12 under a grant from 
the Hudson's Bay Company to Thomas Douglas, 5th earl of 
Selkirk. A part of the Winnipeg colony soon migrated south- 
ward and settled on the site of the present city of Pembina, 
at the mouth of the Pembina river, which they thought to be 
in British territory, and named the settlement Fort Daer. When 
Major Stephen H. Long, commanding an exploring expedition 
to the Minnesota and Red rivers, reached Fort Daer in 1823, 
he found there about six hundred persons, a few being Scotch, 
but the greater part being half-breeds. 

North Dakota formed part of the region ceded by France to 
the United States by the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. From 
1803 to 1805 it was included in the District of Louisiana, and from 
1805 to 1812 it was a part of the Louisiana Territory, the name 
of which was changed to Missouri Territory in 1812. In 1834 

[1] There seems to be no good authority for the statement often 
made that the first settlement in North Dakota was made by 
French Canadians in 1780. 

that part of the present state E. of the Missouri river was included 
in the newly organized Territory of Michigan, and became 
successively a part of Wisconsin Territory in 1836, of Iowa 
Territory in 1838, and of Minnesota Territory in 1849. In 1854 
the Territory of Nebraska was organized from a portion of the 
Missouri Territory, and the part of the Dakotas W. of the 
Missouri, then locally called " Mandan Territory," was included 
in its hmits. After Minnesota entered the Union, in 1858, the 
country between the Red and the Missouri rivers had no Terri- 
torial government for three years, but the inhabitants formed 
a provisional government. On the 2nd of March 1861 the 
Territory of Dakota was created, including the present Dakotas 
and portions of Wyoming and Montana. The scat of the 
Territorial government was fixed at Yankton, and remained 
there until 1883, when it was removed to Bismarck. The name 
of the Territory was derived from the Dakota Indians; the 
word " Dah-ko-ta " (signifying " allied " or " confederated "), 
being originally applied to the Sioux Confederation. In 1863 
when Idaho Territory was formed, the boundaries of the Dakotas 
were fixed at practically their present limits. The boundary 
between Dakota Territory and Nebraska was slightly altered 
in 1870 and 1882. The Territory had hardly been organized 
before its settlement was impeded by the Civil War without and 
by Indian troubles within. In 1862 the Indians began a series of 
bloody massacres along the frontiers of Minnesota and Dakota. 
In the following year General Alfred Sully (1821-1879), command- 
ing United States troops, marched up the Missouri river as far 
as Bismarck, and thence to the valley of the James river. On 
the 3rd of September 1863 with 1200 men he routed 2000 Sioux 
near the present town of Ellendale, in Dickey county, in an 
engagement called the battle of White Stone Hills. Four 
hundred warriors were slain, and a great number were captured. 
In 1864 Sully defeated the Sioux at the battle of Takaakwta, 
or Deer Woods, on the Knife river, and a few days later he 
again encountered them, and after a desperate struggle of 
three days administered a crushing defeat; the warriors 
abandoned their provisions and escaped into the Bad Lands. 
The Indians still remained hostile, however, and in 1865 Sully 
found it necessary to conduct his troops N. as far as Devils 
Lake, and thence W. to the Cannon Ball river. By these opera- 
tions the Indian frontier was fixed W. of the Missouri river, and 
forts and garrisons were placed along this stream. The worst 
of the Indian troubles in northern Dakota were then at an end, 
though for many years there were occasional outbreaks. 

A period of rapid development in the Red river basin followed 
the entrance of the Northern Pacific railway into this region in 1872. 
At the election in November 1887 the question of the division 
of the Territory into two states at the " seventh standard parallel " 
was submitted to the people, and was carried at the polls. In 
accordance with the Enabling Act, which received the president's 
approval on the 22nd of February 1889, a constitutional con- 
vention met at Bismarck on the 4th of July following, and drafted 
a frame of government for the state of North Dakota. In 
October this was ratified at the polls. The chief interest in the 
election turned on the prohibition clause in the constitution, 
which was submitted separately, and received a majority of 
only 1159 votes. On the 2nd of November 1889 President 
Harrison issued a proclamation declaring North Dakota a state. 
By an agreement between North and South Dakota, embodied 
in their constitutions, each state assumed the debt created for 
the erection of public buildings within its limits during the 
Territorial period. 

In the development of the state since its admission into 
the Union the railways have . been an important factor. In 
1894 they inaugurated the so-called " concentration movement," 
and began to conduct annual excursions into North Dakota, thus 
bringing into the state thousands of immigrants. They have 
also adopted the policy of selecting favourable town-sites on 
the uninhabited prairie, erecting grain elevators at such points, 
and furnishing transportation facilities by means of branch 
roads tapping the main lines of travel. Under this system 
prosperous towns and villages have sprung up among the prairies. 

In politics the state has been Republican, except in 1892, when 
the Democrats and Populists combined; in 1906, 1908 and 1910 
a Democratic governor was elected. 

„ r . n . T Territorial Governors. 1 0jC 0£ 
William Jayne 1861-1863 
Newton Edmunds 1 863-1 866 
Andrew J. Faulk 1 866-1 869 
John A. Burbank 1 869-1 874 
John L. Pennington 1 874-1 878 
William A. Howard 2 1 878-1 880 
Nehemiah G. Ordway 1 880-1 884 
Gilbert A. Pierce 1884-1887 
Louis K. Church 1887-1889 
Arthur C. Melette 1889 
State Governors. 
John Miller Republican 1889-1891 
Andrew H. Burke ... ,, 1891-1893 
Eli C. D. Shortridge . . . Democratic 1893-1895 
Roger Alii n Republican 1895-1897 
Frank A. Briggs 8 . ... „ 1 897-1 898 
Joseph M. Devine 4 ... „ 1898-1899 
Frederick B. Fancher . . „ 1 899-1901 
Frank White .... „ 190 1-1905 
Elmore Y. Sarles .... „ 1 905-1 907 
John Burke Democratic 1907- 

Bibliography.— Description: The State of North Dakota: The 
Statistical, Historical and Political Abstract (Aberdeen, S.D., 1889), 
prepared by Frank H. Hagerty, Commissioner of Immigration; North 
Dakota: A Few Facts concerning its Resources ana Advantages 
(Bismarck, 1892), prepared by the Commissioner of Agriculture and 
Labour; Glimpses of North Dakota (Buffalo, 1901), published by the 
North Dakota Pan-American Exposition Company; The Story of 
the Prairies; or, The Landscape Geology of North Dakota (Chicago, 
1902), by D. E. Willard; Explorations in the Dakota Country in 
the Year 1855 (Senate Ex. Doc. No. 76, 34 Cong., 1 Sess., Washington, 
1856) by G. K. Warren; Report on the Geology and Resources of the 
Region in the Vicinity of the Forty-Ninth Parallel (Montreal, 1875), 
by George M. Dawson; United States Geological Survey of the Terri- 
tories. Annual Report for 1872 iContainingThe PhysicalGeography and 
A gricultural Resources of Minnesota .Dakota and NebraskaQNashington, 
1873), by Cyrus Thomas-; publications by the U.S. Geological Survey 
(consult the bibliographies in Bulletins, Nos. 100, 177 and 301). 

Fauna and Flora : United States Geological Survey of the Territories: 
Miscellaneous Publications , No. 3 , Birds of tlie North-west (Washington, 
1874), by Elliot Coues; publications by the United States Geological 
Survey (consult the bibliographies in Bulletins, Nos. 100, 177,301); 
and Wallace Craig, " North Dakota Life : Plant, Animal and Human," 
in Nos. 6 and 7 (June and July) of vol. xl. (1908) of the Bulletin of 
the American Geographical Society (New York). 

History: " Historical Sketch of North and South Dakota," 
in South Dakota State Historical Society Collections (1902), i. 
23-162, by W. M. Blackburn; Illustrated Album of Biography of 
the Famous Valley of the Red River of the North and the Park 
Regions, including the most Fertile and Widely Known Portions of 
Minnesota and North Dakota (Chicago, 1889); New Light on the 
Earlier History of the Greater North-west. The Manuscript Journals 
of Alexander Henry and David Thompson, 179Q-1814, edited by Elliot 
Coues (3 vols., New York, 1897). 


NORTHEIM, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Hanover, on the Ruhme, 12 m. by rail N. of Gottingen and at 
the junction of railways to Cassel and Nordhausen. Pop. (1905) 
7984. It has an interesting Evangelical church, containing 
some old wood-carving and stained glass, a Roman Catholic 
church, several schools and a training college for schoolmasters. 
There are manufactures of tobacco, sugar and boots; other 
industries are flour-milling, tanning and brewing. The place 
is said to date from the 9th century; it obtained civic rights 
in 1208, and later became a member of the Hanseatic League. 
It was stormed by the imperial troops in June 1627. The 
Benedictine abbey of St Blasius was founded in 1063 and dis- 
solved at the Reformation. 

See Wennigerholz, Beschreibung und Geschichte der Stadt Northeim 
(Northeim, 1896). 


NORTHER, a winter wind accompanying the "cold wave" 
that follows the passage of a cyclone across the United States 
of America. A warm S.E. or S.W. wind on the east of such a 
t cyclone materially slackens or entirely dies away, and is followed, 
often suddenly, by the piercingly cold norther. The passage 

	[1] The Territorial government embraced both the present states 
	of North and South Dakota. 

	[2] Died in office on the 10th of April 1880. 

	[3] Died in office, July 1898. 

	[4] Succeeded Frank A. Briggs, deceased, by virtue of his office of 
	lieutenant-governor. 

of a cyclone across America is usually from W. to E., and the 
cyclonic system of circulation would produce these results; 
but as the North American cyclones usually originate east of 
the Rocky Mountains, the warm air drawn from the Gulf of 
Mexico is not only followed by the cold air drawn from the 
Arctic regions, but the body of cold air slides down the eastern 
slopes of the Rockies and advances as a solid wedge (the " cold 
wave ") under the cyclone itself. " Uncomfortably warm in 
the lightest clothing," a traveller upon the prairies of Texas 
may become " uncomfortably cold before he can wrap his 
blanket around him " (W. Ferrel, A Popular Treatise on the 
Winds). The temperature may fall 50 F. in twenty-four hours. 

NORTHFIELD, a city of Rice county, Minnesota, U.S.A., 
on the Cannon river, about 35 m. S. of St Paul. Pop. (1905) 
3438; (191°) 3265. It is served by the Chicago Great-Western, 
the Chicago, Milwaukee & St Paul, and the Chicago, Rock Island 
& Pacific railways. It is a shipping centre for the products 
of the farming and dairying region in which it lies, but it is 
most widely known for its educational institutions. It is the 
seat of the Baker School for Nervous and Backward Children, 
a private institution; of St Olaf College (Norwegian Lutheran), 
founded in 1874; and of Carleton College (founded in 1866 by 
Congregationalists but now non-sectarian, opened in 1870), one 
of the highest grade small colleges in the West, and the first in 
the North-west to abolish its preparatory academy. Carleton 
College has the Goodsell Observatory, which gives the time 
to the railways of the North-west, and publishes a magazine, 
Popular Astronomy. The Scoville Memorial Library (1896) 
of the College had 23,000 volumes in 1909. Northfield has a 
public library and the Minnesota Odd Fellows 7 Widows and 
Orphans Asylum. Named in honour of John W. North, who 
laid out Northfield and several other western towns, it was 
settled about 1851, incorporated as a village in 1868, and 
chartered as a city in 1875. 


NORTHFIELD, a village of Washington county, Vermont, 
U.S.A., in Northfield township, about 35 m. S.E. of Burlington, 
in the Green Mountains region. Pop. (1910) of the village 
191 8; of the township 3226. Northfield is served by the 
Central Vermont railway. It is the seat of Norwich University, 
founded in 1819 as the American Literary, Scientific and Military 
Academy at Norwich, Windsor county, Vermont, by Captain 
Alden Partridge (1 785-1854). Captain Partridge was a pro- 
fessor in the U.S. Military Academy in 1813-1816 and acting 
superintendent of the Academy in 1816-1817, and was president 
of Norwich University until 1843; he founded various other 
military schools besides the one at Norwich. Norwich Univer- 
sity was incorporated in 1834 under its present name, and in 
1866, when the buildings at Norwich were burned, was removed 
to Northfield. 'The charter requires " a course of military 
instruction, both theoretical and practical/' and the discipline 
of the institution is military in form and principle. In 1898 
the university was recognized by the General Assembly of Ver- 
mont as the military college of the state. It offers courses 
leading to the degrees of Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science 
in civil engineering, in electrical engineering and in chemistry. 
In 1908 it had 13 instructors and 168 students. Dewey Hall 
(1902), the administration building, was named in honour of 
Admiral George Dewey, a former student in the university. In 
the township there are outcrops of good granite and of verde 
antique, and along a range of hills E. of the village there is. a 
deposit of very fine black slate. The hills furnish excellent 
grazing for cattle, and much milk is shipped to New England 
cities. The township of Northfield was incorporated in 1781; 
the original settlement on the site of the present village was 
made in 1785, and the village was incorporated in 1855. 

NORTHFLEET, an urban district of Kent, England, within 
the parliamentary borough of Gravesend, on the Thames, 
22 m. E. by S. of London "by the South Eastern and Chatham 
railway. Pop. (1901) 12,906. The church of St Botolph is of 
Norman foundation, but the nave is principally Decorated and 
# the chancel Perpendicular, and the tower, having fallen down, 
'was rebuilt in 1628. The church contains a brass of the 14th 
century and other interesting monuments. The nave and chancel 
have undergone modern restoration. Huggens College, with 
residences for impoverished ladies, was established in 1847 by 
John Huggens of Sittingbourne. Besides chemical manufactures, 
there are chalk, lime, cement and brick works and a ship- 
building yard. Swanscombe almost adjoins Northfleet on the 
south-west. Its name is said to be derived from a camp formed 
here by the Danish king, Sweyn, and tradition fixes at this spot 
the meeting between William the Conqueror and the men of 
Kent, to whom was confirmed the possession of all their ancient 
laws and privileges. 


NORTH HOLLAND, a province of the kingdom of Holland, 
lying between the North Sea and the Zuider Zee, and on the 
landward side bounded by the provinces of South Holland 
and Utrecht. Pop. (1904) 1,053,083; area, 1070 sq. m. The 
province also includes the islands of Texel, Vlieland and Terschel- 
ling, belonging to the group of the Frisian Islands, as well as 
Wieringen, Marken and Urk in the Zuider Zee. There are. 
three natural divisions — foreshore and sand-dunes, inner dunes 
and the geest grounds, and low fens and clay lands. 

The dunes form the great natural barrier against the sea behind 
which the province lies secure. But the fact of there Yieing no 
inlets of the sea is the reason of the absence of commercial towns 
along the sea-board, the only exception being Ymuiden, which 
has arisen at the mouth of the North Sea canal from Amsterdam. 
On the other hand the broad, gently-sloping, sandy beach is 
peculiarly fitted for sea-bathing, and in the absence of harbours 
permits the beaching of the characteristic flat-bottomed fishing 
.boats. Petten, Egmond-on-Sea, Wyk-on-Sea and Zandvoort are 
fishing villages and watering-places. 

In the depressions of the dunes and on the geesl grounds at 
their foot, small woods have been planted in places, and in this 
sheltered strip market-gardening and horticulture are practised. 
Horticulture flourishes, especially along the margin of the geest 
grounds from about 5 m. north of Haarlem to twice that distance 
south, hyacinths, tulips, narcissus and crocuses being the flowers 
chiefly cultivated. The sight of these flowers in spring, with 
mile after mile of brilliant and varied colours, attracts visitors 
even from foreign countries. This region of the province was 
one of the earliest inhabited and includes the oldest towns and 
villages, such as Schagen, which was flourishing in the 12th 
century and was created into a lordship in the beginning of the 
15th century for the benefit of a natural son of Count Albrecht 
of Holland. The castle was demolished in the 19th century, 
but two towers (restored in 1879) are standing. Among interest- 
ing places may be mentioned Alkmaar, Heilo, Egmond, Kastrikum 
and Beverwyk, which, like Velzen a few miles south, was granted 
by Charles Martel to Willebrord, the apostle of the Frisians, in 
the first half of the 8th century. The name is a corruption of 
Bedevaartswyk, " the village on the pilgrims' road," and refers 
to the pilgrimages once made to the church of St Agatha in the 
neighbourhood. Brederode, another ancient village, was the 
seat of the illustrious family of the same name. The remains of 
the castle are extensive. Other ancient towns are Zandpoort, 
Bakenes, Haarlem and Bennebroek, once the seat of a nunnery 
removed hither from Egmond by Dirk II. in the 10th century. 

The third division of the province comprises by far the largest 
area, that, namely, which lies at or below sea-level. The reclama- 
tion of land which has been effected here is noteworthy. The 
whole of the lakes to the north of the former Y, including the 
famous Purmer and Beemster lakes, and the Wieringerwaard 
and Zype sea-polders, were drained in the beginning of the 17th 
century; but the Waard-en-Groet, the Anna Paulowna and the 
Koegras sea-polders to the north of these, were only added to 
the mainland in the first half of the 19th century. This region is 
traversed by the North Holland canal (1810-1825), between 
Amsterdam and the naval station of den Helder. The Y, which 
was formerly an inlet of the Zuider Zee, was drained, and the 
North Sea ship canal was formed in its stead (1865-1876), and 
carried through the dunes to Ymuiden. Of the drained lakes 
south of the former Y, the most important is the Haarlem Lake. 
The landscape in this division of the province is the most typical 
of Holland; green meadows stretching as far as the eye can see, 
dotted with windmills and cattle, and slashed by the regular 
lines of the drainage canals, bordered with pollarded willows. 

As in Friesland, cattle-rearing and the making of cheese, 
chiefly of the Edam description, arc the main industries, but 
agriculture and even a little market-gardening are also practised 
in the heavier clay lands, such as the Y and Anna Paulowna 
polders. Purmerend, Alkmaar and Enkhuizen are the chief 
market centres. Though the country is naturally poor in minerals, 
springs containing iron have been discovered, such as the 
Wilhelminabron at Haarlem. The security of the Zuider Zee 
for trade and fishing purposes was the first factor in the com- 
mercial development of North Holland, and the cities of 
Medemblik, Enkhuizen, Hoorn, Edam and Monnikendam, 
though now little more than market centres for the surrounding 
district, possessed a large foreign commerce in the 16th and 
17th centuries. This prosperity finally concentrated itself upon 
the Y (that is, upon Amsterdam) and the series of industrial 
villages situated on its offshoot the Zaam, of which Zaandam 
and Wormerveer are the most important. 

NORTHINGTON, ROBERT HENLEY, ist Earl of (c. 1708- 
1772), lord chancellor of England, was the second son of Anthony 
Henley, a member of a well-to-do family in Hampshire, who was 
a Whig member of parliament, and a well-known wit and writer. 
Robert was educated at Westminster school and St John's 
College, Oxford; and after gaining a fellowship at All Souls 
he was called to the bar in 1732. In 1747 he was elected member 
of parliament for Bath, of which borough he became recorder in 
1 751. He acquired a lucrative practice at the bar, and in 1756 
was appointed attorney-general. In the following year he was 
promoted to the office of lord keeper of the great seal, being the 
last person so designated. For three years Henley, though still 
a commoner, presided over the House of Lords in virtue of his 
office; but in 1760 he was created Baron Henley of Grainge in 
the county of Southampton. The delay in raising him to the 
peerage was due to the hostility of George II., who resented 
Henley's former support of the prince of Wales's faction, known 
as the Leicester House party; and it was in order that he might 
preside as lord high steward at the trial of Earl Ferrers for 
murder in 1 760 that he then received his patent. On the accession 
of George III. the office of lord chancellor was conferred on 
Henley, and in 1764 he was created Viscount Henley and earl of 
Northington. In 1765 he presided at the trial of Lord Byron for 
killing William Chaworth in a duel. Northington, who was a 
member of the group known as " the king's friends," was 
instrumental' in procuring the dismissal of the marquess of 
Rockingham and the recall of Pitt to office in 1766, and he himself 
joined the government as lord president of the council, Lord 
Camden becoming chancellor. He resigned office in 1767, and 
died at his residence in Hampshire on the 14th of January 1772. 
He married, in 1743, Jane, daughter of Sir John Huband of 
Ipsley, Warwickshire, by whom he had three sons and five 
daughters. His youngest daughter, Elizabeth, married Morton 
Eden, who in 1799 was created Baron Henley in the peerage of 
Ireland; and her grandson, the 3rd Baron Henley of this creation, 
was in 1885 created earl of Northington. 

Lord Chancellor Northington was in his youth a man of convivial 
and boisterous manners, much addicted to swearing. Horace 
Walpole commented on his undignified bearing at the trial of Lord 
Ferrers; but Lord Eldon considered him " a great lawyer, "and his 
integrity was unquestioned. His notes of cases tried by himself 
in the Court of Chancery were published in two volumes in 1818. 

Robert Henley, 2nd earl of Northington (1 747-1 786), only 
surviving son of the lord chancellor, was appointed a teller of 
the exchequer in 1763, and lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1783, an 
office which he administered in a spirit of concession to popular 
claims in Ireland, encouraging native industries and public 
economy, by which he made himself beloved by the Irish people. 
He resigned in 1784, and died unmarried on the 5th of July 
1 786, when the titles granted to his father became extinct. 

See Lord Henley, Memoir of Robert Henley, Earl of Northington 
(London, 1831); Campbell's Lives of the Chancellors; Foss's Judges 
of England; Horace Walpole's Memoirs, 

	Area and relief. 


NORTH SEA f a sea bounded E. by the continent of Europe 
and \V. by Great Britain. At its southern end it communicates 
by the narrow Strait of Dover with the English Channel, and so 
with the Atlantic, and towards the north it widens out gradually 
to 345 m. between St Abb's Head and the coast of Denmark, 
and narrows again to 270 m. between Duncansby Head and the 
coast of Norway. To the north of Scotland it communicates 
with the Atlantic westwards by the Pentland Firth and the 
channel between the Orkney and Shetland Islands, and north- 
wards with the Norwegian Sea. 

Its total area is given by Murray as 162,600 sq. m., and by 
Kriimmel as 571,910 sq. km., or 220,820 sq. statute m. Murray 
estimates the volume of the North Sea at 11,200 cub. 
m., and Kriimmel at 53,730 cub. km. or 12,890 cub. 
m., giving mean depths of 61 and 48 fathoms respect- 
ively. The North Sea is thus on the whole shallow; its 
bed is part of the continental shelf on which the British Isles 
stand, and it slopes upwards with fair regularity from north to 
south. In the south and east there is a broad coastal strip 
over which the depth nowhere exceeds 20 fathoms, and the 
whole south-eastern part of the area is less than 30 fathoms 
deep. In about its middle latitude the Dogger Bank crosses 
the North Sea from east to west, extending for about one-third 
of the whole distance; near the English coast the depth here 
is under 10 fathoms and it increases eastwards to about 20 
fathoms. South of the Dogger there are local depressions, 
mostly of small area, in which the depth is as much as 45 fathoms, 
as in the " Silver Pit." Kriimmel points out that a line drawn 
from the northern edge of the Dogger to the middle of the 
Skagerrack constitutes a rough boundary of the shallow southern 
basin, the depth increasing very slowly beyond this line to the 
" Norwegian Channel " — a deep gully closely following the 
Scandinavian coast, and extending into the Skagerrack, in 
which the depth increases to as much as 400 fathoms. 
* According to Jukes-Browne, the North Sea, in its present form, 
first took shape as a result of the tectonic movements indicated 
History ^y the break between the older and newer Pliocene 
deposits. The southern end of the North Sea was 
probably little affected by the general subsidence which occurred 
during the Glacial period; its boundary in this direction was 
apparently within the present land area of France and Belgium, 
while a narrow inlet may have run westwards between France 
and England in the present position of the Strait of Dover. 
Meanwhile immense quantities of ice detritus from Scotland and 
Scandinavia were deposited in the North Sea, to a thickness 
of perhaps 600 ft., and the whole region was subsequently raised 
above sea-level, constituting the " structural surface " upon 
which the present river system was developed as a series of 
tributaries to a great river which formed a continuation of 
the Rhine. Finally the land subsided again, the plain of the 
North Sea was again submerged, and the western inlet of 
Pleistocene times became the Strait of Dover. 

For reasons which will be sufficiently obvious from the historical 
sketch just given, the coasts of the southern part of the North 
Coasts. Sea are °^ n0 S rea t height. In England they consist 
of low cliffs with sandy beaches, while on the con- 
tinental side are immense flats and marshes, with parts below 
sea-level protected by sand-dunes and artificial dykes. Suess 
has shown that no evidence is forthcoming of tectonic movement 
since the Bronze Age, and the rapid changes of coast-line now 
taking place in many parts are therefore wholly due to the action 
of the sea, which is probably specially effective on account of 
the relatively recent opening of the Strait of Dover. The 
erosion of the North Sea coasts has been made a subject of 
minute study (in England especially by the British Association 
and a committee of the Royal fc Geographical Society), and 
Harmer has obtained interesting results by comparing the 
British and Continental coasts as characteristic " weather " 
and " lee " shores. 

The physical conditions of the waters of the North Sea have 
been extensively studied by expeditions sent out by the Swedish, 
Norwegian, Danish, German and British governments; and since 

	Clrculation. 

1902 by the International Council for the Study of the Sea, 
which owes its origin mainly to the work of the earlier expedi- 
tions. Professor Pettersson of Stockholm, to whose 
initiative much of this work is due, classifies the 
waters found in the North Sea as follows: (1) oceanic 
water of 35 pro mille salinity or more; (2) water of salinity 
34 to 35 pro mille, called " North Sea " water; (3) water of 
salinity 32 to 34 pro mille, found along the coasts of Holland, 
Germany, Denmark, and Norway, and called " bank-water "; 
(4) water of 32 pro mille salinity or less, belonging to the stream 
flowing out from the Baltic. Of these (1) and (4) are to be 
regarded as " in-flowing " waters, while the others are due to 
mixture, which may or may not take place in the North Sea 
itself. The oceanic water consists of a mixture of waters of 
Atlantic and Polar origin; it enters the North Sea from the north- 
west partly from the Norwegian sea, and partly from the Faewe 
channel by the passage between the Orkney and Shetland 
islands, and makes its way southwards along the coast of 
Scotland, especially during the early summer months. 

The International Council, and more particularly the North 
Se&^sheries Investigation Committee of the Fishery Board 
for Scdciand, have studied the periodic and irregular variations 
in the distribution of these waters in minute detail; and the 
results, extending and confirming the observations of the eurlier 
observers, have established the conclusion that the supply of 
fresher coastal waters from the land on both sides of the North 
Sea is greatest in late summer, after the occurrence of the 
maximum inflow of oceanic water. The autumn and early 
winter months accordingly represent a period of mixing rather 
than of inflow, and this mixing is clearly an extremely complicated 
process, depending on the relative amounts of the mixing waters 
(which are themselves liable to great variation), on their tempera- 
ture and salinity, and also on the action of winds and tides. 
In the southern part of the North Sea area tidal action alone 
is sufficiently vigorous to ensure complete mixing of the waters 
from surface to bottom at all times. 

The tides of the North Sea are of great complexity, and have 
not been fully investigated. The tidal wave of the Atlantic enters 
by the Strait of Dover and by the channels in the north. 
In the latter place a division into two parts takes 
place, one wave travelling southwards along the coast of Scotland 
in comparatively shallow water, while another moves with 
greater speed across the deeper water to the Norwegian Channel, 
and thence southwards to the Skagerrack and the Danish coast. 
The southwards-moving waves are greatly retarded in the 
shallow water over the Dogger Bank; the trough of the " Silver 
Pit " accordingly gives the Scottish wave a strong easterly 
component, and the three systems — the Scottish, Norwegian 
and Channel waves — meet to the east of the Dogger, producing 
complicated interference phenomena. Along the English coasts 
the tidal streams are for the most part normal, the flood stream 
running south to south-east and the ebb north to north-west, 
but on the Continental coast the movements become very complex 
on account of the varying influence of the waves from different 
sources. 

The North Sea is particularly rich in organisms of all kinds, 
and the abundance of food attracts fish in such quantities that 
the North Sea fisheries are the most productive in Fauna. 
the world. Flat fishes, and those feeding at the 
bottom on smooth ground, are chiefly caught by means of the 
trawl. The favourite trawling-grounds are the Dogger Bank 
in winter, and the shallow waters off the Continental coasts 
in summer; these yield halibut, soles, turbot, brill, plaice, 
cod, haddock, whiting, &c. In rough ground where the trawl 
cannot be used, hook- and line-fishing are carried on most success- 
fully, and " mid-water "fish are also taken in this way, although 
the trawl and line-fishing overlap considerably. Herring 
and mackerel are caught by means of drift-nets. The herring 
fishing off the British coasts exhibits a remarkable variation 
during summer and autumn, beginning in Shetland in June, 
and becoming progressively later southwards, until it ends 
off the Norfolk coast in November. Various attempts have 

	Tides. 

been made to connect this succession with the physical changes 
already described, especially with the periodic influx of Atlantic 
water, but no very definite relation has been established. 

Authorities. — Krummel and Boguslawski, Ozeanographie ; O 
Pettersson, various papers in the Svenska Vetenskaps-Akademie 
Handlingar, also in Scottish Geographical Magazine (1894) and the 
Geographical Journal; H. N. Dickson, Journal of the Scottish Meteoro- 
logical Society, third series, vol. viii. p. 332 ; Twelfth Report of the 
Fishery Board for Scotland, pt. in. p. 336; Fifteenth Report of the 
Fishery Board for Scotland, pt. iii. p. 280; Geographical Journal 
(March 1896); and Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological 
Society, No. 112 (1899); T. Wemyss Fulton, Fifteenth Report of the 
Fishery Board for Scotland, pt. iii. p. 334; papers by J. T. Cunning- 
ham, W. Garstang and others in the Journal of the Marine Biological 
Association, various years; International Council for the Study 
of the Sea, and North Sea Fisheries Investigation Committee of the 
Fishery Boards for Scotland, Reports and occasional papers. 

(H. N. D.) 


NORTH SEA FISHERIES CONVENTION. This convention, 
dated May 6th, 1882, was the result of a conference which was 
held for the purpose of regulating the police of the fisheries in the 
North Sea. It was entered into by Great Britain, Germany, 
Denmark, Holland, Belgium and France for a period of five years 
and was thereafter to run on until notice of intention to terminate 
it, such notice to affect only the power giving it. The convention 
is operative only outside the three-mile limit from land. This 
limit is defined as follows: — 

"The fishermen of each country shall enjoy the exclusive right 
of fishery within the distance of 3 m. from low-water mark along the 
whole extent of the coasts of their respective countries, as well as 
of the dependent islands and banks. As regards bays, the distance 
of 3 m. shall be measured from a straight line drawn across the bay, 
in the part nearest the entrance, at the first point where the width 
does not exceed 10 m. The present article shall not in any way 
prejudice the freedom of navigation and anchorage in territorial 
waters accorded to fishing boats, • provided they conform to the 
special police regulations enacted by the powers to whom the shore 
belongs.'* 

Under the Herring Fishery (Scotland) Act 1889, the Scottish 
Fishery Board was empowered by by-law to forbid beam- 
trawling and otter-trawling within a line drawn from Duncansby 
Head to Rattras Point. Acting under this power, it forbade 
these methods of trawling. This gave rise to litigation on the 
question of whether the prohibition applied to non-British ships 
beyond the three-mile limit (see Mortensen t>. Peters, July 20th, 
1906). The high Court of Justiciary in Edinburgh held that it 
was not incumbent on the court to draw a distinction between 
foreigners and British subjects which had not been made by 
the legislature, and that therefore any infringements of general 
restrictions imposed, although outside the three-mile limit, were 
binding, whatever the nationality of the persons committing 
them. Outside the limits of territorial waters British law, 
however, does not apply. Thus a later act, the Sea Fisheries 
Regulation (Scotland) Act 1895, though it provided for the 
imposition of restrictions on certain methods of sea-fishing outside 
the limits of territorial waters (s. 8), constructively admitted 
that no power could be given to apply it to non-British fishermen 
fishing beyond British territorial waters. A provision of the 
act empowered the Scottish Fishery Board by by-laws to 
forbid these methods of fishing within 13 m. of the Scottish coast, 
but added that " no area of sea within the said limit of 13 m. 
shall be deemed to be under the jurisdiction of her majesty for 
the purposes of this section unless the powers conferred thereby 
shall have been accepted as binding upon their own subjects with 
respect to such area by all the States signatories of the North Sea 
Convention 1882." 

A supplementary convention was signed at the Hague, 
November 16th, 1887, among the same High Contracting Parties, 
relating to the liquor traffic in the North Sea. It applies to the 
area set out in art. 4 of the Convention of May 6th, 1882, and 
forbids the sale of spirituous liquors within it to persons on board 
fishing vessels. A reciprocal right of visit and search is granted 
under this convention to the cruisers entrusted with the carrying 
out of its provisions. (T. Ba.) 

NORTH SHIELDS, a seaport of Northumberland, England, 
within the municipal and parliamentary borough of Tynemouth 
(q.v. for history, &c). The town of that name adjoins it on the E. 

It lies on the N. bank of the Tyne, immediately above its mouth, 
and opposite to South Shields in Durham, yi m. E. of Newcastle 
by a branch of the North Eastern railway. It is a town of 
modern growth, and contains the municipal offices of the borough, 
a custom-house and various benevolent institutions for seamen. 
The harbour is enclosed by north and south piers, and there is 
a depth of 29 ft. at spring-tides besides the quays. Coal and coke 
are largely exported, and corn, timber and esparto grass are 
imported. There is an extensive fish quay, and about 14,000 
tons of fish are landed annually. There are engineering, iron, 
salt and earthenware works, and some shipbuilding is carried on. 


NORTH SYDNEY, a municipality in the county of Cumberland, 
New South Wales, Australia, on the N. shore of Port Jackson. 
Pop. (1901) 22,050. It is a rapidly growing town, immediately 
opposite and suburban to the city of Sydney, with which, however, 
the only connexion is by steam ferry. It is the terminus of a 
railway system serving the district N. of the town. 


NORTH TONAWANDA, a city of Niagara county, New York, 
U.S.A., on the N. side and at the mouth of Tonawanda Creek 
(opposite Tonawanda), and on the Niagara river, about 14 m. 
N. of Buffalo. Pop. (iqio census) 11,955. Jt is served by 
the Erie, the Wabash, the Lehigh Valley, the West Shore, and 
the New York Central & Hudson River railways, by three 
interurban electric lines and by the Erie Canal. Electric power 
for its factories is furnished by Niagara Falls. In 1905 the value 
of its factory product was $6,499,312. The water-supply comes 
from the Niagara river. North Tonawanda was first settled as a 
part of Tonawanda in 1809; it became a part of Wheatfield 
township in 1857; was incorporated as a village in 1865, and 
chartered as a city in 1897. In 1825 Major Mordecai Manuel 
Noah (1 785-1851), a New York journalist and politician of 
Portuguese Jewish descent, attempted unsuccessfully to found 
on Grand Island (area 27 sq. m.; pop. (1910)914), Erie county, 
W. of North Tonawanda, the city of Ararat, a temporary refuge 
for Jews, who should return thence to the Holy Land. 

See L. F. Allen in Publications of the Buffalo Historical Society, 
vol. i. (1879), pp. 305 sqq. 


NORTHUMBERLAND, EARLS AND DUKES OF, The 
earldom, and later the dukedom, of Northumberland, famous in 
English history by its connexion with the noble house of Percy 
(q.y.) is to be traced from an origin anterior to a strictly regu- 
lated , system of peerage. The Saxon kingdom of Northumbria 
embraced a far more extensive territory than the modern county 
of Northumberland; and for at least a century after the Norman 
Conquest Northumberland, as the name imports, comprised 
a great portion of the country north of the Humber, including the 
cities of Durham and of York. The geographical position of this 
territory, contiguous with the kingdom of Scotland, conferred 
vast responsibility as well as power on the earl or governor to 
whem its administration was entrusted; and it appears to have 
been the policy of William the Conqueror and his immediate 
successors to acknowledge the rights of the men who, though 
sometimes spoken of as earls, were in no strict sense members of 
the feudal nobility created by the Norman monarchy. William 
the Conqueror found Northumberland in the possession of 
Morcar, a younger son of Algar, the Saxon earl of Mercia, who 
on giving in bis submission was confirmed in the government 
of the district, but was soon afterwards imprisoned for rebellion, 
and was replaced by Copsi, an uncle of Morcar's predecessor, 
Tostig. Copsi was murdered a few weeks after receiving the 
dignity, and the same fate befell several of his successors; those 
who escaped it being not infrequently deprived of the post for 
rebelh'on or incapacity. Henry, earl of Huntingdon, only son 
of David I., king of Scotland, was made governor of Northumber- 
land in 1 139, and was styled " earl of Northumberland " by the 
contemporary chronicler Roger of Hoveden. It was not for a long 
period, however, that the earldom of Northumberland came into 
existence as a title of honour heritable according to peerage law. 
Ever since the Conquest the house of Percy (q.v .) had been growing 
in power and importance, and at the coronation of Richard II. 
in 1377 Henry de Percy, 4th Baron Percy, who had distinguished 
himself in the French wars, officiated as marshal of England, and 
was then created earl of Northumberland. With his son Sir 
Henry Percy, the celebrated " Hotspur, " the earl played a leading 
part in the turbulent history of the period, especially in bringing 
about the deposition of Richard II. and the accession of Henry 
IV. The quarrel of Northumberland and his son with King 
Henry over the ransom of their Scottish prisoners taken at 
Homildon Hill on the 14th of September 1402 has been im- 
mortalized by Shakespeare; and in consequence of their re- 
bellion all the earrs honours were forfeited in 1406. He was 
not himself present at the battle of Shrewsbury in July 1403, 
when Hotspur was killed, but be was slain, heading a fresh 
rebellion, at Bramham Moor on the 19th of February 1408. 

The 1 st earl of Northumberland was succeeded by his grandson, 
Hotspur's son, Henry (c. 1394-1455), who was restored to the 
earldom and the estates of the Percies in 1414 and was killed 
at the battle of St Albans in May 1455. The title then descended 
in the male line till the death of the 6th earl in 1537. During 
the Wars of the Roses the Percies took the Lancastrian side, 
which led to the attainder of Henry the 3rd earl (1421-1461) 
during the time of the Yorkist triumph, his forfeited title being 
conferred in 1464 by Edward IV. on John Neville, Lord Montagu 
(see the separate article below), by a patent which was cancelled 
a few years later. The earldom, together with the barony of 
Poynings which his father had obtained by marriage, was 
restored in 1473 to Henry Percy, son of the 3rd earl, who attached 
himself to Edward IV., acquiesced in the accession of Richard 
III., and submitted to Henry VII., by whom he was received 
into favour. His grandson Henry, the 6th earl (c. 1 502-1 537), 
left no direct heir, and the latter's nephew, Thomas Percy, was 
debarred from the succession by an attainder passed on his 
father for his participation in the Pilgrimage of Grace. In 1549, 
however, Thomas was restored in blood, and in 1557 he became 
by a new creation earl of Northumberland, 7th of his line. 
Meantime, in 1551, John Dudley, earl of Warwick, was created 
duke of Northumberland (see the separate article below), his 
title being, however, forfeited by attainder in 1553. 

The earldom restored to the house of Percy by the creation 
of 1557 continued without interruption in the male line till 
1670. The 7th earl was beheaded in 1572 for sharing in a 
conspiracy in which he was joined by the earl of Westmorland 
with the object of securing the release of Mary Queen of Scots 
and the free exercise of the Catholic religion. By the .earl's 
attainder the baronies of Percy and of Poynings and the earldom 
of Northumberland of the older creation were forfeited, but 
owing to a clause in the patent the newer earldom of Northumber- 
land and the other honours conferred in 1557 passed to his 
brother Henry (c. 153 2-1 585), who, however, is usually known 
as the 8th and not the 2nd earl. 

Henry's grandson, Algernon Percy, 10th earl of Northumber- 
land (1 602-1 668), son of Henry the 9th earl (1564-163 2), became 
a peer in his father's lifetime as Baron Percy in 1626. During 
the years immediately preceding the Civil War he served as an 
admiral, making earnest but unsuccessful efforts to reform the 
navy, and in 1637 he was made lord high admiral of England. 
In 1639 Charles I. appointed him general of the forces north 
of the Trent, and a member of the council of regency. North- 
umberland played a distinguished and honourable part in the 
troubled times of the Civil War. He was a friend of Strafford, 
and gave evidence at his trial which, though favourable on the 
important point of bringing the Irish army to England, was 
on the whole damaging; and he afterwards leaned more and 
more towards the popular party, of which he soon became leader 
in the House of Lords. He was a member of the committee 
of safety, and later of the committee of both kingdoms; and 
he took an active part in the attempts to come to terms with 
the king, whom he visited at Oxford for that purpose in 1643 
. and at Uxbridge two years later. Northumberland helped to 
organize the new model army; and in 1646 he was entrusted 
by parliament with the charge of- the king's younger children. 
He led the opposition in the House of Lords to the proposal 
to bring Charles I. to trial, and during the Commonwealth he 
took no part in public affairs. At the Restoration he was called 
to the privy council by Charles II., and with his habitual modera- 
tion he deprecated harsh proceedings against the regicides. 
His second wife, Elizabeth (d. 1705), daughter of Theophilus 
Howard, 2nd earl of Suffolk, brought him Northumberland 
House in the Strand, London, which was demolished in 1874 
to make room for Northumberland Avenue. On the death of 
his son Joceline, the nth earl, in 1670, the male line became 
extinct. 

George Fitzroy (1665-1716), third son of Barbara, duchess 
of Cleveland, the wife of Roger Palmer, earl of Castlemaine, by 
King Charles II., was created by his father earl of Northumber- 
land in 1674, and duke in 1683. This second dukedom of 
Northumberland became extinct on his death at Epsom on the 
3rd of July 1716. 

Meanwhile Elizabeth Percy, daughter of Joceline, the nth 
earl, had married Charles Seymour, 6th duke of Somerset; and 
her son Algernon, the 7th duke, was in 1749 created Baron 
Warkworth and earl of Northumberland, with remainder to 
his son-in-law, Sir Hugh Smithson, Bart., son of Langdale 
Smithson of Langdale, Yorkshire. Sir Hugh Smithson (c. 1714- 
1786) took the name and arms of Percy on inheriting the earldom 
in 1750;. in 1766 he was created Earl Percy and duke of North- 
umberland, and in 1784 he was further created Baron Lovaine 
of Alnwick, with special remainder to his second son, Lord 
Algernon Percy. He took a somewhat prominent part in politics 
as a follower of Lord Bute, and was one of George III.'s confi- 
dential advisers, holding the office of lord-lieutenant of Ireland 
from 1763 to 1765, and that of master of the horse from 1778 
to 1780. He was a man of cultivated tastes, and spent large 
sums of money in repairing and improving Alnwick Castle and 
his other residences. His wifo> Elizabeth (17 16-1776), who was 
a prominent figure in society, inherited in her own right her 
father's barony of Percy. The duke was succeeded by his 
eldest son Hugh; and his second son Algernon, Lord Lovaine, 
was created earl of Beverley in 1790. 

Hugh, 2nd duke of this line (1 742-1817), first inherited his 
mother's barony of Percy. He was present at the battle of 
Minden, and although in parliament, where he was member for 
Westminster from 1763 to 1776, he had opposed the policy that 
led to the American war, he proceeded to Boston in 1774 as 
colonel commanding the 5th Fusiliers, a regiment that has 
since then been known as the Northumberland Fusiliers. His 
generosity to his men made him exceedingly popular in the army; 
he became a general in 1793, and after succeeding to the dukedom 
in 1786 he exercised considerable influence in politics, though 
he never obtained office. His son Hugh, 3rd duke (1785-1847), 
was lord-lieutenant of Ireland in 1 820-1830, when the Catholic 
Emancipation Act was passed, and was pronounced by Sir* 
Robert Peel " the best chief governor that ever presided over 
the affairs of Ireland. " Both he and his brother Algernon, 
4th duke (1792-1865), who was created Baron Prudhoe in 1816, ■ 
died without issue; the barony of Percy devolved on their 
great-nephew, the duke of'AthoIl, and the dukedom passed to 
George (1 778-1867), eldest son of Algernon, 1st earl of Beverley, 
and so to his son, the 6th duke (1810-1899), and grandson, the 
7th duke (b. 1846), who married the daughter of the 8th duke 
of Argyll. The 7th duke's eldest son, Earl Percy (1871-1910), 
seemed destined to take a great place in public life when he 
was prematurely cut off; he had a distinguished career at 
Oxford and from 1895 in the House of Commons, being under- 
secretary for India in 1902-1903 and under-secretary for foreign 
affairs in 1903-1905. 

See Edward Barrington de Fonblanque, The House of Percy 
(2 vols., London, 1887); G. E. C(okayne), Complete Peerage, vol. vi. 
(London, 1895). 


NORTHUMBERLAND, JOHN DUDLEY, Viscount Lisle, 
Earl of Warwick, and Duke of (c. 1502-1553), was the 
eldest son of Henry VII. *s extortionate minister, Edmund 
Dudley (q.v.), by his second wife Elizabeth, daughter of Edward 
Grey, Viscount Lisle, and co-heiress of her brother John, Viscount 
Lisle. He was probably descended from the old baronial house 
of Sutton alias Dudley; but his father's attainder and execution 
in 1509 clouded his prospects. His mother, however, married 
as her second husband in 1511 Arthur Plantagenet, the illegiti- 
mate son of Edward IV., who in 1523 was created Viscount 
Lisle in his wife's right; and Lisle's rise in Henry VIII. 's favour 
brought young Dudley into prominence. In 151 2 he was 
restored in blood and in 1538 he was made deputy to his step- 
father, who was governor of Calais, and he does not appear to 
have suffered by Lisle's temporary disgrace and imprisonment 
in the Tower. Lisle died early in 1542 and Dudley was created 
Viscount Lisle on the 12th of March and was made warden of 
the Scottish marches in November, and lord high admiral of 
England in 1543 in succession to his future rival, Edward 
Seymour, earl of Hertford. He was also created a knight of 
the garter and sworn of the privy council on the 23rd of April 
1543. In 1544 he accompanied Hertford to the capture and 
burning of Edinburgh. On the capture of Boulogne in September 
Lisle was given command of the town and of the Boulonnais; 
in 1545 he directed the operations of the fleet in the Solent 
which foiled the French attack on Portsmouth and the Isle 
of Wight; and he was sent to Paris to ratify the peace con- 
cluded in 1546. 

Lisle had thrown in his lot with the reforming party, and 
he took an active share in the struggle at Henry VTII.'s court 
for control of affairs when Henry should die. Hertford and 
he were described by the Spanish ambassador as holding the 
highest places in Henry VIII. 's affections and as being the only 
noblemen of fit age and ability to carry on the government. 
The Howards were infuriated by the prospect, and Surrey's 
hasty temper ruined their prospects. Lisle quarrelled bitterly 
with Bishop Gardiner, served as commissioner at Surrey's trial, 
and was nominated one of the body of executors to Henry's 
will from which Norfolk and Gardiner were excluded. On 
Henry's death Lisle was raised to the earldom of Warwick and 
promoted to be lord great chamberlain of England, again in 
succession to Hertford, who became duke of Somerset and 
Protector. But he was not long content with Somerset's 
superiority, though he concealed his resentment and ambition 
for the time. He accompanied Somerset on his Pinkie cam- 
paign, and materially contributed to the winning of that victory. 
Nor did he exhibit any sympathy with the intrigues of the 
Protector's brother, Thomas Seymour, the lord high admiral; 
his subtler policy was to exasperate the brothers and thus 
weaken the influence of the house of Seymour. He took a 
leading part in the proceedings which brought the admiral to 
the block in March 1549; and then used the Protector's social 
policy to bring about his deposition. Warwick, like most of the 
privy council, detested Somerset's ideas of liberty and his 
championship of the peasantry against the inclosure movement ; 
one of his own parks was ploughed up as a result of a com- 
mission of inquiry which Somerset appointed; and when the 
peasants rebelled under Kett, Warwick gladly took the command 
against them. His victory at Dussindale made him the hero of 
the landed gentry, and as soon as he had returned to London 
in September 1549, he organized the general discontent with 
the Protector's policy into a conspiracy. He played upon the 
prejudices of Protestants and Catholics alike, holding out to 
one the prospect of more vigorous reform and to the other hopes 
of a Catholic restoration, and to all gentry the promise of revenge 
upon the peasants. 

The coalition thus created effected Somerset's deposition 
and imprisonment in October 1549; and the parliament which 
met in November carried measures of political coercion and 
social reaction. But the coalition split upon the religious 
question. Warwick threw over the Catholics and expelled 
them from office and from the privy council, and the hopes they 
entertained were rudely dashed to the ground. -But it was 
difficult to combine coercion of the Catholics with the proscrip- 
tion of Somerset; the duke was therefore released early in 1550 
and restored to the privy council; and his daughter was married 
to Warwick's son. Warwick himself assumed no position of 
superiority over his colleagues, and he was never made protector. 
But he gradually packed the council with his supporters, and 
excluded his enemies from office and from access to the king. 
His plan was to dominate Edward's mind, and then release him 
from the trammels of royal minority. He abandoned the Tudor 
designs on Scotland, and made a peace with France in 1550 by 
which it recovered Boulogne and was left free to pursue its 
advantage in Scotland. Nor did the betrothal of Edward to 
Henry's daughter Elizabeth prevent the French king from 
intriguing to undermine English influence in Ireland. In 
domestic affairs Warwick pushed on the Reformation with none 
of the moderation shown by Somerset; and the difference 
between the two policies is illustrated by the change effected 
between the first and second Books of Common Prayer. War- 
wick, however, was widely distrusted; and the more arbitrary 
his government grew, the more dangerous became Somerset's 
rivalry. A parliamentary movement had early been started 
for Somerset's restoration. Warwick therefore kept parliament 
from meeting, and the consequent lack of supplies drove him 
into the seizure of church plate, sale of chantry lands, and other 
violent financial expedients. At length he resolved to get rid 
of his opponent; his opposition was magnified into conspiracy, 
and in October 1551, after Warwick had made himself duke of 
Northumberland and his ally Dorset, duke of Suffolk, and had 
scattered other rewards among his humbler followers, Somerset 
was arrested, condemned by the peers on a charge of felony, 
and executed on the 22nd of January 1552. 

Parliament was permitted to meet on the following day, but 
for the next eighteen months Northumberland grew more and 
more unpopular. He saw that his life was safe only so long as 
he controlled the government and prevented the administration 
of justice. But Edward VI. was slowly dying, and Northumber- 
land's plot to alter the succession was his last desperate bid for 
life and power. Its folly was almost delirious. Edward had no 
legal authority to exclude Mary, and the nation was at least 
nine-tenths in her favour. Northumberland bullied the council 
and overawed London for a few days; but the rest of England 
was in an uproar, and as he rode out to take the field against 
Mary, not a soul cried " God speed." A few days later he re- 
turned as Mary's prisoner. He was tried for treason, professed 
himself a Catholic in the delusive hope of pardon, and was 
executed on the 22nd of August. He was a competent soldier 
and one of the subtlest intriguers in English history; but he 
had no principles. He was, says a contemporary French account, 
" de parole affable, se composant a gracieusite et doulceur, mais 
au dedans felon, orgueilleux, vindicatif s'il en fut jamais." The 
violence of his rule and of his pretended Protestantism was 
largely responsible for the reaction of Mary's reign. His best- 
known son was Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Queen Eliza- 
beth's favourite. 

See Letters and Papers of Henry VIII. ; State Papers, Domestic 
and Foreign, Edward VI. and Mary; MS. 15,888, Bibliolbkque 
Nationale de France; G. E. C(okayne), Complete Peerage; A. F. 
Pollard, England under Somerset (1900), Life of Cranmer (1904) 
and vol. vi. of the Political History of England (19 10). (A. F. P.) 


NORTHUMBERLAND, JOHN NEVILLE, Earl of (c. 1430- 
1471), English soldier, was the third son of Richard Neville, earl 
of Salisbury, and a brother of Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, 
the " king-maker." At the battle of Blore Heath in 1459 John 
Neville was taken prisoner by the Lancastrians, although the 
Yorkists under his father had won the victory; he was among 
those who were attainted in the parliament of Coventry, and 
he was not released until 1460 when his own party had gained 
the upper hand. Just afterwards he was created Lord Montagu 
and was made chamberlain of the royal household. He was not 
present at the battle of Wakefield, when his father was taken 
prisoner, but he was again a captive after the second battle of 
St Albans in 146 1. He was speedily released by Edward IV., 
whom he served in the north of England, being rewarded with 
lands and honours. In 1463 he became warden of the east 
marches towards Scotland, and he was responsible for the Yorkist 
victories at Hedgeley Moor and at Hexham in April and May 
1464; after the latter battle he secured the execution of Henry 
Beaufort, duke of Somerset, and other captives of high station. 
In this year (1464) he was created earl of Northumberland, the 
Percies being now crushed, and their head, Henry Percy, being 
in prison. Northumberland did not at first, join his brother 
Warwick and the other Nevilles when they revolted against 
Edward IV., but neither did he help the king. Edward, doubt- 
less suspecting him, restored the earldom of Northumberland 
and its vast estates to Henry Percy, while John Neville's only 
recompense was the barren title of marquess of Montagu. At 
Pontefract in 1470 he and his men declared for Henry VI., a 
proceeding which compelled Edward IV. to fly from England, 
and under the restored king he regained his position as warden, 
but not the earldom of Northumberland. He did not attempt 
to resist Edward IV. when this king landed in Yorkshire in 
March 147 1, but he fought under Warwick at Barnet, where he 
was slain on the 14th of April 147 1. His son George (d. 1483) 
was betrothed to Elizabeth, daughter of Edward IV., and was 
created duke of Bedford in 1470, but the marriage did not take 
place and he was deprived of his dukedom in 1477. 


NORTHUMBERLAND, the northernmost county of England, 
bounded N.W. by the Scottish counties of Berwick and Rox- 
burgh, W. by Cumberland, S. by Durham, and E. by the North 
Sea. The area is 2018 sq. m. It has a general inclination 
eastward from the hill-borders of Scotland and Cumberland. 
The Cheviot range partly separates Northumberland from 
Scotland, and reaches in the Cheviot, its culminating point 
north-eastward, the greatest elevation in the county, 2676 ft. 
The elevation of the Cheviots rarely falls below 1300 ft. along 
the Border, and generally exceeds 1600. A line of high ground, 
bending southward, forms the watershed between the North 
and Irish Seas. The boundary with Cumberland crosses the low 
divide between the Irthing and the South Tyne, after coinciding 
with the former river for a short distance, and giving Northumber- 
land a small drainage area westward. In the south-west a 
small area of the Pennine uplands is included in the county, 
reaching elevations up to 2206 ft. in Kilhope Law. Few 
eminences break the general eastward incline, which appears 
as a wide billowing series of confluent hills that for half the year 
mingle tints of brown, russet, and dun in a rich pattern, and at 
all times communicate a fine sense of altitude and expanse. 
The Simonside Hills (1447 ft.) form one not very conspicuous 
exception. The configuration of much of these uplands has a 
certain linearity in its details due to groups and ranges of ridges, 
crags, and terrace-like tiers, termed " edges" (escarpments) 
by the country folk, and generally facing the interior, like broad 
ends of wedges. The line of pillared crags and prow-like head- 
lands between the North and South Tynes along the verge of 
which the Romans carried their wall is a fine specimen. Passing 
eastwards from the uplands the moors are exchanged for enclosed 
grounds, " drystone " walls for hedgerows, and rare sprinklings 
of birch for a sufficiently varied wooding. The hills and moors 
sink to a coast generally low, a succession of sands, flat tidal 
rocks and slight cliffs. Its bays are edged by blown sandhills; 
its borders are severely wind-swept. Several islands lie over 
against it. Holy Island, the classic Lindisfarne, 105 1 acres 
, in extent, but half " links " and sandbanks, is annexed to the 
mainland and accessible to conveyances every tide. The Fame 
Islands (q.v.) are a group of rocky islets farther south. 

Deep glens and valleys, scoring the uplands, and richly wooded 
except at their heads, are characteristic of the rivers. Of these 
the chief are the Tweed, forming the north-eastern part of the 
Scottish border, its tributary the Till (with its feeders the Glen 
and College), the Aln and the exquisite Coquet, flowing into 
Alnmouth Bay, the Wansbeck, with its tributary the Font, the 
Blyth and the Tyne, forming part of the boundary with Durham, 
the union of the North and South Tynes. Many of the upland 
streams attract trout-fishermen. 

Geology. — The core of the county, in a geological aspect, is the 
■ northern Cheviots from Redesdale head nearly to the Tweed. Its 
oldest rocks arc gritty and slaty beds of Silurian age, about the head 
of the rivers Rede and Coquet and near the Breamish south of 
Ingram — a part of the great Silurian mass of the southern uplands 
of Scotland. Volcanic activity about the period of the Old Red 
Sandstone resulted in the felspathic porphyrites, passing into the 
syenites and granites, that form the mass of the northern Cheviots. 
Round this core there now lie relays of Carboniferous strata dipping 
cast and south, much faulted and repeated in places, but passing 
into Coal Measures and Magnesian Limestone in the south-eastern 
part of the county. The whole system consists of (1) the Carboni- 
ferous Limestone series in three divisions; (2) the Millstone Grit; and 
(3) the Coal Measures. Lowest in Northumberland lies Tate's 
Tuedian group, the first envelope of sinking Cheviot-land. Some 
reddish shore-like conglomerates lie in places at its base, as at 
Roddam Dene; its shales are often tinged with distemper greens; 
its coals are scarcely worthy of the name; its limestones are thin, 
except near Rothbury ; and its marine fossils are few. The Tuedian 
group is overlaid by the Carbonaceous group ; its shales are carbo- 
naceous-grey, its coals, though mostly small, very numerous, its 
limestones often plant-limestones, and its calcareous matter much 
diffused^ _ Upon this lies the Calcareous group ; its lime occurs in 
well-individualized marine beds, croprjing up to the surface in green- 
vested strips; its fossils are found in recurrent cycles, with the 
limestones and coals forming their extremes. These three groups 
now range round the northern Cheviots in curved belts broaden- 
ing southwards, and occupy nearly all the rolling ground between 
the Tweed and the South Tyne, the sandstones forming the chief 
eminences. The middle division becomes thinner and more like 
the Coal Measures in passing northwards, and the upper division, 
thinning also, loses many of its limestones. The Millstone Grit is 
a characterless succession of grits and shales. The Coal Measures 
possess the same zone-like arrangement that prevails in the Lime- 
stone series, but are without limestones. They also arc divided, 
very artificially, into three groups. The lowest, from the Brockwell 
seam downwards, has some traces of Gannister beds, and its coal- 
seams are thin. The famous Hutton collection of plants was made 
chiefly from the roof-shales of two seams — the Bensham and the 
Low Main. The unique Atthcy collection of fishes and Amphibia 
comes from the latter. The Coal Measures lie along the coast in a 
long triangle, of which the base, at the Tyne, is produced westwards 
on to the moors south of that river, where it is wedged against lower 
beds on the south by a fault. The strata within the triangle give 
signs of departing from the easterly dip^ that has brought them 
where they are, and along a line between its apex (near Amble) and 
an easterly pointy in its base (near Jarrow) they turn up north- 
eastwards, promising coal-crops under the sea. 

The top of the Coal Measures is wanting. After a slight tilting 
of the strata and the denudation that removed it, the Permian rocks 
were deposited, consisting of Magnesian Limestone, a thin fish-bed 
below it, and yellow sands and some red sandstone (with plants of 
Coal Measure species) at the base. These rocks are now all but 
removed. They form Tynemouth rock, and lie notched-in against 
the 90-fathom dyke at Cullercoates, and again are touched (the base 
only) at Seaton Sluice. No higher strata have been preserved. 
The chief faults of the county extend across it. Its igneous rocks,, 
other than the Cheviot porphyrites and a few contemporaneous 
traps in the lowest Carboniferous, are all intrusive. An irregular 
sheet of basalt forced between planes of bedding (perhaps at the 
close of the Carboniferous period) forms the crag-making line of 
the Great Whinsill, which, with many shifts, breaks and gaps, 
extends from Greenhead near Gilsland to the Kyloe Hills. Numbers 
of basalt dykes cross the county, and were probably connected 
with the plateau of Miocene volcanic rocks in the Hebrides. Every- 
where the Glacial period has left rocks rounded and scored, and rock- 
fragments from far and near rubbed up into boulder-clay. The 
glaciers at first held with the valleys, but as the ice-inundation 
grew they spread out into one sheet — the Cheviot tops, heavily 
ice-capped, alone rising above it. Two great currents met in con- 
fluence around these hills — one from across the western watershed, 
the other skirting the coast from the north. Boulders from Galloway, 
Criffel, the Lake District and other places adjacent, and from the 
Lammermuirs and Berwickshire, lie in their track. Of moraines 
there are only a few towards the hills. Glaciated shell-fragments 
have been detected at Tynemouth. Laminated brick clays occur 
among the boulder-clays. Sheets and mounds of gravel of the 
nature of kames exist here and there on the low grounds, and stretch 
in a chain over the low watershed between Haltwhistle and Gilsland, 
sparsely dotting also some more upland valleys. An upper boulder- 
clay, containing flints, skirts the coast. 

The older valleys are all prc-Glacial, and may date from the 
Miocene period. They are much choked up with Glacial deposits, 
and lie so deep below the surface that, if they were cleared-out 
arms of the sea, one of them, 140 ft. deep at Newcastle, would extend 
for miles inland. After the departure of the glaciers the streams 
here and there wandered into new positions, and hence arises a 
great variety of smooth slope and rocky gorge. In the open country 
atmospheric waste has hollowed out the snales at their outcrops, 
leaving the sandstones, &c, as protruding " edges,'* roughened 
here and there into crags. In the lower grounds, where this surface- 
dissection first began, the "edges" have much run together; on 
the heights, whose turn came last, they are often prominent and 
crest-like, but have glacier-rounded brows. Many old tarns are 
now sheeted over with peat. The sloping peat-fields are often the 
sites of straggling birch-woods, now buried. 

Climate.— The climate is bracing and healthy, with temperate 
summers (e.g. the average July temperature at Alnwick is 57 -9° F.). 
In spring east winds prevail over the whole county. The lambing 
season in the higher uplands is fixed for the latter half of April, 
and is even then often too early. In summer and autumn west 
winds are general. The rainfall gradually increases as the country 
rises from the coast, thus the mean annual fall at Shields is 26*32 in., 
at Alnwick 31-04 in., while on the western borders 40 to 60 in. are 
recorded. East winds in summer bring rain to the interior. The 
smell from the coal-field, the lighter grime of which is detected as 
far as Cumberland, is taken by the shepherd for a sign of wet. 

Agriculture, &c. — About five-ninths of the total area is under 
cultivation, and of this nearly fivc-seventhsis in permanent pasture. 
There are also about 470,000 acres under hill pasture. South of the 
river Coquet there is a broad tract of cultivation towards the coast 
that sends lessening strips up the valleys into the interior. From 
the Coquet northwards another breadth of enclosed ground stretches 
almost continuously along the baseof the Cheviot hills. In the 
basin of the Till it becomes very fertile, and towards the Tweed the 
two breadths unite. In the porphyritic Cheviots the lower hills 
show a great extent of sound surface and good grass. The average 
hill-farms support about one sheep to 2 acres. A coarser pasturage 
covers the Carboniferous hills, and the proportion of stock to. surface 
is somewhat less. In the highest fells the congeries of bogs, hags 
and sandstone scars, with many acres dangerous to sheep, are 
worthless to the farmer. The lower uplands are a patchwork of 
coarse grasses (mown by the " muirmen " into " bent-hay ") and 
heather, or, in the popular terms, heather and " white ground," 
for it is blanched for eight months in the year. Heather is the 
natural cover of the sandstones and of the sandy glacier-debris 
near them. On the uplands they grow bents; lower down they 
are apt to be cold and strong, but are much relieved by patches 
and inworkings of gravel, especially north of the Wansbeck. The 
prevalent stream-alluvium is sandy loam, with a tincture of peat. 
The arable regions are very variable. Changes of soil are probably 
as numerous as fields^ The bulk of the acreage under corn crops, 
which has greatly diminished, is under oats and barley, and turnips 
occupy some five-sixths of the area under green crops. North- 
umberland is one of the largest sheep-rearing counties in Great 
Britain. Of these, the half-breds — crosses between trie Leicester 
(or Shropshire) and Cheviot breeds — occupy the lower enclosed 
grounds, the pure Cheviots are on the uplands and the hardier 
black-faced breeds lie out on the exposed heathery heights. The 
cattle are chiefly shorthorns and Galloways. They are very largely 
raised, chiefly for fattening purposes. 

The practice of paying wages in kind has passed greatly into 
disuse. Some of the shepherds still receive " stock-wages," being 
allowed to keep forty or fifty sheep and several cows on their em- 
ployers' farms in lieu of pay. This arrangement, which makes 
them really copartners, has probably done much to render them the 
singularly fine class of men they are. 

Other Industries. — The manufactures of the county chiefly come 
from the Tyne, which is a region of ironworks, blast-furnaces, ship- 
building yards, ropewdrks, coke-ovens, alkali-works and manufac- 
tories of glass, pottery and fire-bricks, from above Newcastle to the 
sea. Machines, appliances, conveyances and tools are the principal 
articles of manufacture in metal. There is great activity in all trades 
concerned in pit-sinking and mine-working. In the other parts of 
the county there are a few small cloth-mills, a manufactory of tan 
gloves at Hexham, some potteries and numbers of small brick and 
tile works. There are several sea-fishing stations, of which North 
Shields is by far the most important. The salmon fisheries are also 
valuable. 

Communications. — Communications^ are provided almost wholly 
by the North-Eastern railway, of which the main line enters the 
county at Newcastle and runs N. by Morpeth, and near the coast, 
to Berwick, where a junction on the East Coast route from London 
to Scotland is effected with the North British railway. Numerous 
branch railways serve the populous south-eastern district, and there 
are connexions westward to Hexham and Carlisle, up the Tweed 
valley into Scotland and (by the North British line) up the North 
Tyne valley from Hexham. The principal ports besides the Tyne 
ports are Blyth, Amble (Warkworth Harbour), Alnmouth and 
Berwick. The Tyne is one of the most important centres of the 
coal-shipping trade in the world. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the ancient 
county is 1,291,530 acres with a population in 1891 of 506,442, 
'and in 1001 of 603,498. In physique the Northumbrian is 
stalwart and robust, and seldom corpulent. The people have 
mostly grey eyes, brown hair and good complexions. The 
inhabitants of the fishing villages appear to be Scandinavian; 
and parts of the county probably contain some admixture of 
the old Brit-Celt, and a trace of the Gipsy blood of the Faas of 
Yetholm. The natives have fine characteristics: they are 
clean, thrifty and plodding, honest and sincere, shrewd and 
very independent. Their virtues lie rather in solidity than in 
aspiration. 

Northumbrian speech is characterized by a " rough vibration 
of the soft palate" or pharynx in pronouncing the letter r, well 
known as the burr, a peculiarity extending to the town and 
liberties of Berwick, and absent only in a narrow strip along the 
north-west. Over the southern part of the county there is the 
same duplication of vowel-sounds, such as " peol " for " pool," 
that is found in the English counties adjacent. Many Old- 
English forms of speech strike the ear, such as " to butch a beef," 
i.e } to kill a bullock, and curious inversions, such as "they not 
can help." There is the Old-English distinction in the use of 
" thou " to familiars and " ye " to superiors. 

The area of the^ administrative county is 1,291,515 acres. The 
county is divided into nine wards, answering to hundreds. Popula- 
tion is^ densest in the south-east, where the mining district and the 
Tyneside industrial area are situated. The municipal boroughs in 
this district are: Newcastle-upon-Tyne (city, county of a city and 
county borough; pop. 215,328), Tynemouth (county borough, 
51.366), Morpeth (6158), a Wallsend (20,918). In this district the 
following are urban districts: Amble (4428), Ashington (13,956), 
Bedlington (18,766), Blyth (5472), Cowpen (17,879), Cramhngton 
(6437)1 Earsdon (9020), Gosforth (10,605), Newbiggin-by-thc-Sea 
(2032), Newburn (12,500), Seghill (2213), Weetslade (5453), Whitley 
and Monkseaton (7705), Wifiington Quay (7941). Tne remainder 
of the county contains the municipal borough of Berwick-upon- 
Tweed (13,437) and the urban districts of Alnwick (6716), Hexham 
(7071) and Rothbury (1303). The county is in the north-eastern 
circuit, and assizes are held at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. The total 
number of civil parishes is 523. The ancient county, which is in the 
diocese of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, with the exception of a small portion 
in that of Durham, contains 173 ecclesiastical parishes or districts, 
wholly or in part. The parliamentary divisions of the county are 
Berwick-upon-Tweed, Hexham, Wansbeck and Tyneside, each re- 
turning one member; while the parliamentary borough of Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne returns two members, and those of Morpeth and 
Tynemouth one member each. 

History. — The first English settlement in the kingdom of 
Bernicia, which included what is now Northumberland, was 
effected in 547 by Ida, who, accompanied by his six sons, pushed 
through the narrow strip of territory between the Cheviots and 
the sea, and set up a fortress at Bamburgh, which became the 
royal seat of the Saxon kings. About the end of the 6th century 
Bernicia was first united with the rival kingdom of Deira under 
the rule of ^Ethelfrith, and the district between the Humber 
and the Forth became known as the kingdom of Northumbria. 
In 634 Cad walla was defeated at Hefenfeld (the site of which 
lies in the modern parish of St John Lee) by Oswald, under whom 
Christianity was definitely established in Northumbria, and the 
bishop's see fixed at Hexbam, where Bishop Wilfrid erected the 
famous Saxon church. Oswald also erected a church of stone 
at Tynemouth, which was destroyed in 865 in an incursion of 
the Danes under Hinguar and Hubba. The extent of Danish 
influence in Northumberland has been much exaggerated, 
however, for though in 876 Halfden, having conquered the whole 
of Northumbria, portioned out the lands among his followers, 
the permanent settlements were confined to the southern portion 
of the kingdom. In the northern half, which is now Northumber- 
land, the English princes continued to reign at Bamburgh as 
vassals of the Danes, and not a single place-name with the Danish 
suffix " by " or " thorpe " is found north of the Tyne. In 938 
;Etbelstan annexed Northumberland to his dominions, and the 
Danish authority was annulled until its re-establishment by 
Canute in 1013. The vigorous resistance of Northumbria to the 
Conqueror was punished by ruthless harrying. The Normans 
rebuilt the Saxon monasteries of Lindisfarne, Hexham and 
Tynemouth; Eustace Fitz John founded Alnwick Abbey, and 
other Norman abbeys were Brinkburn, Hulne, Blanchland and 
Newminster. Castles were set up at Alnwick, Warkworth, 
Prudhoe, Dunstanborough, Morpeth, Ford, Chillingham, Lang- 
ley, Newcastle, Bamburgh, Wark and Norham, a stronghold of 
the palatine bishops of Durham. 

The term Northumberland is first used in its contracted 
modern sense in 1065 in an entry in the Saxon Chronicle relating 
to the northern rebellion. The county is not mentioned in the 
Domesday Survey, but the account of the issues of the county, 
as rendered by Odard the sheriff, is entered in the Great Roll 
of the Exchequer for 113 1. In the reign of Edward I. the county 
of Northumberland was found to comprise the whole district 
between the Tees and the Tweed, and to have within it the 
several liberties of Durham, Sadberg and Bedlington south of 
the Coquet, and Norham beyond the Coquet, all subject to the 
bishop of Durham; the liberty of Hexham belonging to the 
archbishop of York; that of Tynedale to the king of Scotland; 
that of Emildon to the earl of Lancaster; and that of Redesdale 
to Gilbert de Umfraville, earl of Angus. These franchises were 
all held exempt from the ordinary jurisdiction of the shire. By 
statute of 1495-1496 the lordship of Tynedale was annexed to 
Northumberland on account of flagrant abuses of the liberties 
of the franchise; the liberty of Hexham was annexed to North- 
umberland in 1572; Norhamshire, Islandshire and Bedlington- 
shire continued to form detached portions of Durham until 1844, 
when they were incorporated with Northumberland. The 
division into wards existed at least as early as 1295, the Hundred 
Roll of that year giving the wards of Coquetdale, Bamburgh, 
Glendale and Tynedale. 

The shire-court for Northumberland was held at different 
times at Newcastle, Alnwick and Morpeth, until by statute of 
1549 it was ordered that the court should thenceforth be held 
in the town and castle of Alnwick, and under the same statute 
the sheriffs of Northumberland, who had lately been in the 
habit of appropriating the issues of the county to their private 
use, were required to hereafter deliver in their accounts to the 
Exchequer in the same manner as the sheriffs of other counties. 
The assizes were held at Newcastle, and the itinerant justices, 
on their approach to the county, were met by the king of Scot- 
land, the archbishop of York, the bishop of Durham and the prior 
of Tynemouth, who pleaded their liberties either at a well called 
Chille near Gateshead, if the justices were proceeding from York, 
or, if from Cumberland, at Fourstanes. In these franchises the 
king's writ did not run, and their owners performed the office 
of sheriff and coroner. Among other Northumbrian landowners 
claiming privileged jurisdiction in 1293 was Robert de Quonla, 
who claimed that he and his men were quit of the suits of the 
shire and wapentake; the prior of St Mary of Carlisle claimed 
to exclude the king's bailiffs from executing their office in his 
fee of Corbridge, and that he and his men were quit of the suits 
of the shire and wapentake. The burgesses of Newcastle claimed 
return of writs in their borough, and Edmund, the brother of 
Edward I., claimed return of writs and exemptions from the 
sheriff's jurisdiction in his manor of Stamford. Newcastle was 
made a county by itself by Henry IV. in 1400, and has juris- 
diction in admiralty cases. Ecclesiastically the county was in 
the diocese of Durham, and in 1291 formed the archdeaconry 
of Northumberland, comprising the deaneries of Newcastle, 
Corbridge, Bamburgh and Alnwick. In 1535 the archdeaconry 
included the additional deanery of Morpeth. The archdeaconry 
of Lindisfarne was formed in 1845, and subdivided into the rural 
deaneries of Alnwick, Bamburgh, Morpeth, Norham and Roth- 
bury; the archdeaconry of Northumberland then including the 
deaneries of Bellingham, Corbridge, Hexham and Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne. In 1882 Northumberland was formed into a separate 
diocese with its see at Newcastle, the archdeaconries and 
deaneries being unaltered. In 1885 the additional deaneries of 
Tynemouth and Bedlington were formed in the archdeaconry 
of Northumberland, and in 1900 the deanery of Glendale in the 
archdeaconry of Lindisfarne. 

Pre-eminent among the great families connected with North- 
umberland is that of Percy (q.v.). Ford and Chipchase were 
seats of the Heron family. The Widdringtons were established 
at Widdrington in the reign of Henry I. and frequently filled 
the office of sheriff of the county. The barony of Prudhoe was 
granted by Henry I. to the Umfravilles, who also held the castles 
of Otterburn and Harbottle and the franchise of Redesdale. 
From the Ridleys of Willimoteswyke was descended Bishop 
Ridley, who was martyred in 1555. Aydon Castle was part 
of the barony of Hugh Baliol. The Radcliffes, who held Dilston 
and Cartington in the 15th century and afterwards acquired 
the extensive barony of Langley, became very powerful in 
Northumberland after the decline of the Percies, and were 
devoted adherents of the Stuart cause. 

From the Norman Conquest until the union of England and 
Scotland under James L, Northumberland was the scene of 
perpetual inroads and devastations by the Scots. Norham, 
Alnwick and Wark were captured by David of Scotland in the 
wars of Stephen's reign, and in 1290 it was at Norham Castle 
that Edward I. decided the question of the Scottish succession 
in favour of John Baliol. In 1295 Robert de Ros and the earls 
of Athol and Menteith ravaged Redesdale, Coquetdale and 
Tynedale. In 13 14 the county was ravaged by Robert Bruce, 
and in 1382 by special enactment the earl of Northumberland 
was ordered to remain on his estates in order to protect the 
county from the Scots. In 1388 Henry Percy was taken prisoner 
and 1500 of his men slain at the battle of Otterburn, immortalized 
in the ballad of " Chevy Chase." Alnwick, Bamburgh and 
Dunstanborough were garrisoned for the Lancastrian cause in 
1462, but after the Yorkist victories of Hexham and Hedgley 
Moor in 1464, Alnwick and Dunstanborough surrendered, and 
Bamburgh was taken by storm. In 1513 the king of Scotland 
was slain in the battle of Flodden Field on Branxton Moor. 
During the Civil War of the 17th century Newcastle was 
garrisoned for the king by the earl of Newcastle, but in 1644 it 
was captured by the Scots under the earl of Leven, and in 1646 
Charles was led there a captive under the charge of David 
Leslie. Many of the chief Northumberland families were ruined 
in the rebellion of 1715. 

The early industrial development of Northumberland was 
much impeded by the constant ravages of internal and border 
warfare, and in 1376 the commonalty of Northumberland begged 
consideration for their sheriff, who, although charged £100 for 
the profits of the county, through death and devastation by the 
Scots could only raise £53, 3s. 4d. Again Aeneas Sylvius 
Piccolomini (Pope Pius II.), who passed through the county 
disguised as a merchant in 1436, leaves a picture of its barbarous 
and desolate condition, and as late as the 17th century, Camden, 
the antiquarian, describes the lands as rough and unfit for culti- 
vation. The mineral resources, however, appear to have been 
exploited to some extent from remote times. It is certain that 
coal was used by the Romans in Northumberland, and some 
coal ornaments found at Angerton have been attributed to the 
7th century. In a 13th-century grant to Newminster Abbey a 
road for the conveyance of sea-coal from the shore about Blyth 
is mentioned, and the Blyth coal-field was worked throughout 
the 14th and 15th centuries. The coal trade on the Tyne did 
not exist to any extent before the 13th century, but from that 
period it developed rapidly, and Newcastle acquired the monopoly 
of the river shipping and coal-trade. Lead was exported from 
Newcastle in the 12th century, probably from Hexhamshire, 
the lead mines of which were very prosperous throughout the 
1 6th and 17th centuries. In a charter from Richard I. to Bishop 
Pudsey creating him earl of Northumberland, mines of silver 
and iron are mentioned, and in 1240 the monks of Newminster 
had an iron forge at Stretton. A salt-pan is mentioned at Wark- 
worth in the 12th century; in the 13th century the salt industry 
flourished at the mouth of the river Blyth, and in the 15th 
century formed the principal occupation of the inhabitants 
of North and South Shields. In the reign of Elizabeth glass- 
houses were set up at Newcastle by foreign refugees, and the 
industry spread rapidly along the Tyne. Tanning, both of 
leather and of nets, was largely practised in the 13th century, 
and the salmon fisheries in the Tyne were famous in the reign 
of Henry I. 

The county of Northumberland was represented by two 
members in the parliament of 1290, and in 1295 Bamburgh, 
Corbridge and Newcastle-upon-Tyne each returned two members. 
From 1297, however, Newcastle was the only borough repre- 
sented, until in 1524 Berwick acquired representation and 
returned two members. Morpeth returned two members from 
1553. Under the Reform Act of 1832 the county returned four 
members in two divisions; Berwick and Newcastle were repre- 
sented by two members each, and Morpeth and Tynemouth by 
one member each. Under the act of 1885 the county now returns 
four members in four divisions. 

Antiquities, — Of Anglo-Saxon buildings the Danes left almost 
nothing. The crypt of Wilfrid's abbey of St Andrew at Hexham is 
one undoubted remnant; portions of several other churches are 
very doubtfully pre-Norman. Some thousand Saxon stycas found 
buried at Hexham, the '* fridstool " there, and an ornate cross now 
shared between Rothbury and Newcastle are the other principal 
vestiges of Saxon times. The Black Dyke, a bank and ditch crossing 
the line of the Roman wall about 3 m. east of the Irthing, is supposed 
by some antiquaries to be the continuation of the Catrail at Peel Fell; 
the latter was the probable boundary-fence between the Saxon 
Bernicia and the British Strathclyde. 

The ecclesiastical buildings of the county suffered greatly at 
the hands of the Scots. Not a few of the churches were massive 
structures, tower-like in strength, and fit to defend on occasion. 
Lindisfarne Priory, the oldest monastic ruin in the country, dates 
from 1093. Hexham Abbey Church, raised over the crypt of 
Wilfrid's cathedral, has been termed a " text-book of Early English 
architecture." Of Brinkburn Priory the church remains, and has 
been well restored. Hulne Abbey was the first Carmelite monastery 
in Britain. Besides these there are fragments of Newminster Abbey 
(U39). Alnwick Abbey (1147) and others. An exquisitely graceful 
fragment of Tynemouth church is associated with some remains 
of the older priory. _ St Nicholas's church, Newcastle (1350), was the 
prototype of St Giles's, Edinburgh. There is a massive Norman 
church at Norham, and other Norman and Early English churches 
at Mitford, Bamburgh, Warkworth (with its hermitage), Alnwick 
(St Michael's) &c, most of them with sguare towers. The stone 
roof of the little church at Bcllingham, with its heavy semicircular 
girders, is said to be now unique. 

" It may be said of the houses of the gentry herein," writes 
Fuller, " ' quot mansiones, tot munitiones,' as being all castles or 
castle-like." Except a few dwellings of the 16th century in New- 
castle, and some mansions built after the Union of England and 
Scotland, the older houses are all castles. A survey of 1460 mentions 
thirty-seven castles and seventy-eight towers in Northumberland, 
not probably including all the bastle-houses or small peels of the 
yeomen. At the Conquest Bamburgh, the seat of the Saxon kings, 
was the only fortress north of York. Norham Castle was built in 
1 1 2 1 . None of the baronial castles are older than the time of Henry I. 
A grass mound represents Wark Castle. Alnwick Castle is an array 
of walls and towers covering about five acres. Warkworth, Prudhoe 
and Dunstanburgh castles are fine groups of ruins. Dilston Castle 
has still its romantic memories of the earl of Derwentwater. Bel- 
say, Haughton, Featherstone and Chipchase castles are joined 
with modern mansions. The peel-towers of Elsdon, Whitton 
(Rothbury) and Embleton were used as fortified rectory-houses. 
Seaton Delaval was the work of Vanbrugh. 

The place-names of the county may be viewed as its etymological 
antiquities. The Danish test-suffix by is absent. Saxon tons, hams, 
cleughs (clefts or ravines) and various patronymics are met with in 
great numbers; and the Gaelic knock (hill) and Cymric caer, dwr 
(water), cefn (ridge), bryn (brow), &c, mingle with the Saxon. Many 
curiosities of place-nomenclature exist, some strange, some expressive, 
e.g. Blink-bonny, Blaw-wearic, Skirl-naked, Pity Me. 

Authorities. — Victoria County History, Northumberland; North- 
umberland County History Committee, A History of Northumberland 
(in process) (Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1893, &c.) ; John Hodgson, A 
History of Northumberland, in 3 parts (1827-1840); E. Mackenzie, 
An Historical View of the County of Northumberland (2nd ed., 2 vols., 
Newcastle, 1811); Society of Antiquaries, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, A 
History of Northumberland, pt. i. containing the general history of 
the county, state of the district under the Saxon and Danish kings, 
&c. (Newcastle, 1858); Arcliaeologia Aeliana, or Miscellaneous 
Tracts relating to Antiquity, published by the Society of Antiquaries 
of Newcastle-upon-Tyne (4 vols., Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1822-1855; 
new series, 1857, &o); William Wallis, The Natural History and 
Antiquities of Northumberland (2 vols., London, 1769) ; W. S. Gibson, 
Descriptive and Historical Notices of some remarkable Northumbrian 
Castles, Churches and Antiquities, series i. (London, 1848); Early 
Assize Rolls for Northumberland, edited by William Page, Surtees 
Society (London, 1891). 


NORTHUMBRIA (regnum Northanhymbrorutn), one of the 
most important of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, extended from 
the Ilumber to the Forth. Originally it comprised two in- 
dependent kingdoms, Bernicia and Deira (q.v.). Each of these 
had a dynasty of its own. The first known king of the former 
was Ida, who, according to tradition, acquired 'the throne in 
547 and reigned twelve years. To him the foundation of Bam- 
burgh is attributed. Four of Ida's sons successively occupied 
his throne: Glappa 550-560, Adda 560-568, Aethelric 568-572, 
and Theodoric 572-579. Of the first three nothing is known, 
but Theodoric is said (Hisloria Brittonum) to have been besieged 
by the Welsh under Urien in Lindisfarne. Theodoric was 
succeeded by Frithuwald 579-585 or 586 and Hussa 586-592 or 
593. Then ^thclf rith (q.v.) , son of ^Ethelric, came to the throne. 

He greatly extended his territories at the expense of the Welsh, 
and eventually provoked an invasion of Aidan, king of the Scots, 
whom he defeated at a place called Daegsastan (603). The first 
king of Deira of whom we know was Ella, or Aelle, who, according 
to Bede, was still reigning when Augustine arrived in 597. The 
Saxon Chronicle, which is a lass reliable authority for North- 
umbrian history, places his death in the year 588. The compiler 
of this work, however, seems to have used a regnal list of the 
Bernician kings, which differed considerably from most ef those 
found in our early authorities. ^Ethelfrith eventually acquired 
possession of Deira, probably in 604 or 605, perhaps on Ella's 
death, expelling his son Edwin (q.v.). Thenceforward, with 
rare intervals, the two kingdoms remained uniced. ^Ethelfrith 
became involved in war with the Welsh towards the end of his 
reign and captured Chester, probably about 613. Shortly after- 
wards, in 616, he was defeated and slain in battle on the river 
Idle by Edwin, who was assisted by the East Anglian king 
Raedwald. Edwin now became king over both Northumbrian 
provinces. By his time the kingdom must have reached the 
west coast, as he is said to have conquered the islands of Anglesea 
and Man. Under Edwin the Northumbrian kingdom became 
the chief power in the country. At his death in 633 the kingdom 
was again divided, Deira falling to his nephew Osric, while 
Bernicia was occupied by Eanfrith son of '^Ethelfrith. Both 
these kings were slain by Ceadwalla in the following year, but 
shortly afterwards the Welsh king was overthrown by Oswald 
(q.v.), brother of Eanfrith, who reunited the whole of North- 
umbria under his sway and acquired a supremacy analogous to 
that previously held by Edwin. After Oswald's defeat and 
death at the bands of Penda in 642 Bernicia fell to his brother 
Oswio, while Oswine son of Osric became king in Deira, though 
probably subject to Oswio. Oswine's death was compassed by 
Oswio in 651, and the throne of Deira was then obtained by 
iEthelwald son of Oswald. He is not mentioned, however, 
after 655, so it is probable that Deira was incorporated in the 
Bernician kingdom not long afterwards. After Oswio's victory 
over Penda in 654-655 he annexed the northern part of Mercia 
to his kingdom and acquired a supremacy over the rest of 
England similar to that held by his predecessors. The Mercians, 
however, recovered their independence in 658, and from this 
time onward Northumbria played little part in the history of 
southern England. But Oswio and his son Ecgfrith greatly 
extended their territories towards the north and north-west, 
making themselves masters of the kingdoms of Strathclyde and 
Dalriada, as well as of a large part of the Pictish kingdom. 
Ecgfrith (q.v.) t who succeeded on Oswio's death in 671, expelled 
the Mercians from Lindsey early in his reign, but was in turn 
defeated by them in 679, his brother ^Elfwine being slain. From 
this time onwards the Humber formed the boundary between 
the two kingdoms. In 684 we hear of the first English invasion 
of Ireland, but in the following year Ecgfrith was slain and 
his army totally destroyed by the Picts at a place called Nech- 
tansmere (probably Dunnichen Moss in Forfarshire). The Picts 
and Britons now recovered their independence; for Aldfrith, 
apparently an illegitimate son of Oswio, who succeeded, made 
no attempt to reconquer them. He was a learned man and a 
patron of scholars, and during his reign the Northumbrian 
kingdom partially recovered its prosperity. He was succeeded 
in 705 by his son Osred, and under him and his successors 
Northumbria began rapidly to decline through the vices of its 
kings and the extravagance of their donations. Osred was slain 
in 716. He was succeeded by Coenred 716-718, and Coenred by 
Osric 718-729. The next king was Ceolwulf, to whom Bede 
dedicated his Hisloria Ecclesiastica in 731. In the same year he 
was deposed and forced to become a monk, but was soon restored 
to the throne. In 737 he voluntarily retired to a monastery and 
left the kingdom to his cousin Eadberht. The latter appears to 
have been a vigorous ruler; in the year 740 we hear of his being 
involved in war with the Picts. ^Ethelbald of Mercia seems to 
have taken advantage of this campaign to ravage Northumbria. 
In 750 Eadberht is said to have annexed a large part of Ayrshire 
to his kingdom. Finally in 756, having now allied himself with 
(Engus king of the Picts, he successfully attacked Dumbarton 
(Alcluith), the chief town of the Britons of Strathclyde. Ead- 
berht showed considerable independence in his dealings with 
the church, and his brother Ecgberht, to whom the well-known 
letter of Bede is addressed, was from 734 to 766 archbishop of 
York. In 758 Eadberht resigned the kingdom to his son Oswulf, 
and became a monk. After his abdication Northumbrian history 
degenerates into a record of dynastic murders. Oswulf was 
slain by his household at a place called Mechil Wongtun in 759. 
Moll ^Ethelwald, who" may have been a brother of Eadberht, 
succeeded, and after a victory over a certain Oswine, who fell 
in the battle, abdicated and became a monk probably under 
compulsion in 765. His successor Alehred claimed descent from 
Ida, but Simeon of Durham appears to doubt the truth of his 
claim. He sent an embassy to Charlemagne in 768 and was 
deposed in 774, whereupon he fled to Bamburgh and afterwards 
to the Picts. His deposition has been ascribed to a formal act 
of the Witan, but this seems an antedating of constitutional 
methods and the circumstances point to a palace revolution. The 
successor of Alehred was ^Ethelred son of Moll ^Ethelwald. In 
778 three high-reeves were slain at the instigation of the king. 
^Ethelred was expelled during the next year, perhaps in con- 
sequence of this event, and^Elfwald son of Oswulf became king. 
JElixvald was murdered by Sicga in 789, whereupon Osred his 
nephew the son of Alehred succeeded. In 790 the banished 
^Ethelred returned to the throne and drove out Osred, whom 
he put to death in 792. ^Ethelred, who had married ^Elflaed 
the daughter of Offa, also killed CElf and (Elfwine, the sons of 
CElfwald and was murdered himself at Corbridge in 796. Oswald, 
who is called palricius by Simeon of Durham, succeeded, but 
reigned only twenty-seven days, when he was expelled and 
eventually became a monk. Eardwulf dux, who had apparently 
fled abroad to escape the wrath of ^Ethelred, was now recalled 
and held the crown until 807 or 808. ^Elfwald then became 
king, but Eardwulf was restored in 808 or 809 after appealing 
to the emperor and the pope. Eanred, son of Eardwulf, probably 
came to the throne in 809 and reigned until 841. It was during 
his reign in 827 that Northumbria acknowledged the supremacy 
of Ecgberht, king of Wessex. Eanred was succeeded by his son 
^Ethelred, who was slain in 850, when Osberht came to the 
throne and reigned until 863. On the expulsion of Osberht, Ella 
or JE\\e f succeeded. The chroniclers emphasize the fact that 
this king was not of royal descent. He is said to have slain 
Ragnarr LoSbrok. In the year 866 Lo5brok's sons Ingwaere 
(Fvarr, q.v.), Healfdene, Ubba and others brought a vast army 
to England to avenge the death of their father. In the following 
year they obtained possession of York. Ella seems now to have 
made peace with the exiled king Osberht, and their united 
forces succeeded in recovering the city. In the great battle 
which ensued the Northumbrian army was annihilated and both 
kings slain (the death of Ella, according to Irish tradition, being 
due to the treachery of one of his followers). The southern 
part of Northumbria now passed entirely into the hands of the 
invaders, but they allowed a certain Ecgberht to reign over 
the portion of the kingdom north of the Tyne. Ecgberht was 
expelled in 872 and died in the course of the following year. 
His successor Ricsig died in 876 and was followed by Ecgberht II., 
who reigned until 878. He was the last English king who 
reigned in Northumbria. After him the chief power north of 
the Tyne came into the hands of a certain Eadulf of Bamburgh, 
who did not take the kingly title, but accepted the overlordship 
of Alfred the Great perhaps in 886. In the winter of 874-875 
Healfdene returned to Northumbria, which he partitioned among 
his followers. He was probably killed in Ireland in 877. Simeon 
of Durham makes his death occur about the same time, after 
he had been expelled from his country and had lost his reason 
as a punishment for his misdeeds. After an interregnum of a 
few years a certain Guthred became king in 883. He is said to 
have been a slave and to have been appointed king at the com- 
mand of St Cuthbert, who appeared to Eadred the abbot of 
Carlisle in a dream. There is some reason for the conjecture 
that he belonged to the family of LoSbrok. He died in 894, 
after which date little is known of Northumbrian history for a 
number of years. About the year 919 the country was invaded 
by Raegenald (Rognvaldr grandson of Tvarr), a Norwegian king 
from Ireland, who seized York and occupied the lands of St 
Cuthbert. Aldred, the son of Eadulf, who now ruled north of 
the Tyne, appealed to Constantine II., king of the Scots, for 
help, but the Scottish and Northumbrian armies were defeated 
at Corbridge. Shortly after this, however, all the northern 
princes submitted to Edward the Elder. Raegenald was suc- 
ceeded by Sihtric (Sigtryggr, another grandson of I'varr), who 
married ^Ethelstan*s sister. He died in 926, and his brother 
and successor Guthfrith was soon afterwards expelled by ^Ethel- 
stan and fled to Eugenius, king of Strathclyde. The Welsh 
and Scottish kings, however, both submitted to ^Ethelstan, and 
Guthfrith was again driven into exile. He died in 934, leaving 
a son Anlaf (Olafr), Godfredsson or Godfreyson. In 934 ^Ethel- 
stan invaded Scotland as far as the Tay. In 937 a great fleet 
and army were brought together by Constantine and Anlaf, 
the son of Sihtric, another Norwegian chieftain who had allied 
himself with the Scots, helped by Anlaf Godfreyson from Ireland. 
^Ethelstan, however, won a complete victory over them at a 
place called Brunanburh, probably Burnswark in Dumfries- 
shire. Anlaf Godfreyson returned to Ireland and died in 941- 
942 in a raiding expedition in the south of Scotland. Anlaf the 
son of Sihtric again came to England in 940 just after the death 
of ^Ethelstan. He became king of Northumbria and extended 
his territories as far as Watling Street. Peace was made with 
King Edmund by the capture of King Anlaf, and a good deal 
later by the confirmation of King Raegenald, brother to Anlaf 
Godfreyson and cousin to Anlaf Sihtricson. About two years 
later, however, both these kings were expelled by Edmund, and 
the whole of Northumbria was brought under his power. About 
the second year of Eadred's reign there was another revolt and 
Eric Bloodaxe, the exiled king of Norway, obtained the throne. 
During the next few years the kingdom alternated between 
Eric and Anlaf until 954, when Eadred finally succeeded in 
establishing his power. Eric was killed by Maccus, the son of 
Anlaf. while Anlaf himself withdrew to Ireland, where he died 
in 980. Eadred placed Northumbria in the hands of a certain 
Osulf, who is called high-reeve at Bamburgh. In the reign of 
Edgar, Oslac was appointed earl of southern Northumbria, but 
he was banished at the beginning of the following reign. The 
next earl was Waltheof and after him Uhtred, who defeated 
Malcolm II., king of the Scots, in 1006. Twelve years later, 
however, the Northumbrians were completely defeated at 
Carhan, and Lothian was annexed by the Sects (see Lothian). 
Uhtred was slain by the orders of Canute, who gave the province 
to Eric (Eirikr) earl of Lade. Shortly afterwards, however, 
part of it at least came into the hands first of .Eadulf and then 
Aldred and another Eadulf, the brother and sons respectively 
of Uhtred. The younger Eadulf was slain by Siward, probably 
in the reign of Hardacanute. Siward held the earldom till his 
death in 1055, when it was given to Tostig, son of earl Godwine, . 
and after his banishment to Morkere, son of ^Elfgar, earl of 
Mereia. Tostig's banishment led to the invasion of Harold 
Hardrada, king of Norway, and the battle of Stamford Bridge, 
in which both perished. 

Authorities. — Bede, Historia ecclesiastica, ed. C. Plummer 
(Oxford, 1896); Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, ed. Earle and Plummer 
(Oxford, 1809); "Annales Lindesfarnenses," in the Monumenta 
historica Germanica, Band xix. (Hanover, 1866); Simeon of Durham 
(" Rolls" series), ed. T. Arnold (1882); J. C H. R. Steenstrup, 
Normannerne (Copenhagen, 1 876-1 882). d (F. G. M. B.) 


NORTH WALSHAM, a market town in the eastern parlia- 
mentary division of Norfolk, England; 131 m. N.E. by N. 
from London by the Great Eastern railway. Pop. of urban 
district (1901) 3981. It lies in a pastoral district near the river 
Ant, a tributary of the Bure. The church of St Nicholas is a 
fine Perpendicular structure exhibiting the flint-work common to 
the district, and possessing a beautiful south porch and the ruin 
of a massive western tower which partly collapsed early in the 
1 8th century. A grammar school was founded in 1606, and 
reorganized and moved to new buildings in modern times. There 
is a market house of the 16th century. A considerable agri- 
cultural trade is carried on, and cattle-shows and fairs are held. 
The river Ant provides a route southward to the Norfolk Broads. 
The coast village of Mundesley, 5 m. N.E. by a branch railway, 
is in favour as a watering-place, having fine sands beneath the 
cliffs. In the district between this and North Walsham are 
Paston, taking name from the family which is famous through 
the Paston Letters (q.v.) y and the fragments of Bromholm 
Priory, a Cluniac foundation. These are of various dates from 
Norman onwards, but are incorporated with farm buildings. 
The rood of Bromholm was a reputed fragment of the Cross 
which attracted many pilgrims. To the south of North Walsham 
is North Walsham Heath, whither in June 1381 a body of in- 
surgents in connexion with the Peasants' Revolt were driven 
from before Norwich by Henry le Despenser, bishop of Norwich, 
and defeated; after which their leader, Geoffrey Lister, and 
others were sent to the scaffold. 

NORTH-WEST FRONTIER PROVINCE, the most northerly 
province of British India, created on the 25th of October iqoi. 
Roughly it may be defined as the tract of country N. of Baluch- 
istan, lying between the Indus and Afghanistan. More exactly 
it consists of (1) the cis-Indus district of Hazara; (2) the com- 
paratively narrow strip between the Indus and the hills con- 
stituting the settled districts of Peshawar, Kohat, Bannu and 
Dera Ismail Khan; and (3) the rugged mountainous region 
between these districts and the borders of Afghanistan, which 
is inhabited by independent tribes. This last region is divided 
into five agencies: Dir, Swat and Chitral, with headquarters at 
Malakand; Khyber, Kurram, Tochi and Wana. The province 
lies between 31 4' and 36 57' N., and 6q° 16' and 74 f E. 
The approximate area is 38,665 sq. m., of which 13,193 sq. m. 
are British territory and the remainder is held by tribes under 
the political control of the Agent to the Governor-General. 
On the N. it abuts on the Hindu Kush. To the S. it is bounded 
by Baluchistan and Dera Ghazi Khan district of the Punjab, 
on the E. by Kashmir and the Punjab, and on the W. by 
Afghanistan. 

1. Hazara District — The district of Hazara extends north- 
eastwards into the outer Himalayan Range, tapering to a narrow 
point at the head of the Kagan valley. The mountain chains which 
enclose Kagan sweep southward into the^ broader portion of the 
district, throwing off well-wooded spurs which break up the country 
into numerous isolated glens. Approaching Rawalpindi district 
the hills open out, and rich plain lands take the place of the terraced 
hillsides and forests of the more northern uplands. The Babusar 
Pass at the head of the Kagan valley marks the most direct approach 
to Chilas and Gilgit from the plains of India. (See Hazara). 

2. The Settled Districts. — The tract between the Indus and the 
hills consists of four open districts, Peshawar, Kohat, Bannu and 
Dera Ismail Khan, divided one from the other by low hills. The vale 
of Peshawar is for the most part highly irrigated and well wooded, 
presenting in the spring and autumn a picture of waving cornfields 
and smiling orchards framed by rugged hills. It has, however, an 
evil name for malarial fever. Adjoining Peshawar, and separated 
from it by the Jowaki hills, lies the district of Kohat, a generally 
hilly tract intersected by narrow valleys. The largest of these 
traverses the district from Kushalgarh on the Indus to Thai on the 
Kurram, narrowing in places, but usually opening out into wide 
cornlands and pastures dotted with the dwarf palm. This district 
affords striking contrasts of scenery, from the^ sheltered fields of 
Miranzai to the barren desolation of the salt^ mines. The southern 
spurs of the Kohat hills gradually subside into the Bannu plain. 
Where irrigated from the Kurram river, especially round Bannu 
itself, this tract is well cultivated and forms a great contrast to the 
harsh desolation of the Kohat hills. But beyond the sphere of irri- 
gation, where the land is dependent on the rainfall, there is much 
rough stony ground broken by great fissures cut by flood-water 
from the border hills. To the cast this gives way to the broad level 
plain of Marwat, which in favourable years presents a uniform ex- 
panse of rich cultivation extending from Lakki to the base of the 
Shekh Budin hills. These hills consist of a broken range of sandstone 
and conglomerate dividing the Bannu plain from the cultivated 
flats of Dera Ismail Khan. 

3. The Country of the Independent Tribes. — Turning to the moun- 
tainous region between the settled districts and Afghanistan, to the 
extreme north lies the agency of Dir, Swat and Chitral. Chitral 
itself consists of a narrow valley enclosed between rugged mountains. 
Below Chitral are found the thickly timbered forests of Dir and 
Bajour, and the fertile valleys of the Panikora and Swat rivers. 
Between this agency and the Khyber Pass lie the Mohmand hills, 
a rough country with but little cultivation, under the political control 
of Peshawar. West and south-west of the Khyber again is the 
country of the Afridis and the Orakzais. The boundary of the 
province here follows the line of the Safed Koh, which overlooks the 
Afridi Tirah and the upper Kurram valley. Dotted with towered 
hamlets and stately chinar groves the valley of the Kurram runs 
south-cast from the Peiwar Kotal (below the great peak of Sikaram), 
past Thai in the Miranzai valley, through the southern Kohat hills 
to Bannu. ^ South of the Kurram is the Tochi valley, separating it 
from Waziristan, an isolated mountainous district bounded on the 
south by the Gomal and thegorges that lead to the Wana plain. 
The lower ridges of the frontier mountain system are usually bare 
and treeless, but here and there, as in the Kaitu valley, in northern 
Waziristan and round Kaniguram in the south, are forest clad and 
enclose narrow but fertile and well-irrigated dales. In places, too, 
as, for instance, round Shawal, the summer grazing ground of the 
Darwesh Khel Waziris,and on the slopes of Pir Ghol, there is Rood 
pasturage and a fair sprinkling of deodars. The valleys of the Tochi 
and Wana are both fertile, but are very different in character. 
The former is a long narrow valley, with a rich fringe of cultivation 
bordering the river ; the latter is a wide open alluvial plain, cultivated 
only on one side, and for the rest rough stony waste. South of the 
Gomal the Suliman Range culminates in the famous Takht-i- 
Suliman in the Largha Sherani country, a political dependency of 
Dera Ismail Khan district. The Kaisargarh peak of the Takht-i- 
Suliman is 11,300 ft. above sea-level. 

Mountain Systems. — The mountains of the Hindu Kush running 
from east to west form the northern boundary of the province, 
and are met at the north-cast corner of the Chitral agency by the 
continuation of an outer chain of the Himalayas after it crosses the 
Jndus above the Kagan valley. From this chain minor ranges run 
in a south-westerly direction the whole length of Bajour and Swat, 
till they merge into the Mohmand hills and connect the mid-Hima- 
layas with the Safed Koh. The range of the Safed Koh flanks the 
Kurram valley and encloses the Kabul basin, which finds its outlet 
to the Indus through the Mohmand hills. The Suliman system lies 
south of the Gomal unconnected with the northern hills. To the east 
the Safed Koh extends its spurs into the Kohat district. The Salt 
Range crosses the Indus in the Mianwali tahsil of the Punjab, and 
forms the boundary between Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan, merging 
eventually in the Waziri hills. The chief peaks in the province are 
Kaisargarh (11,300 ft.) and Pir Ghol (11,580 ft.) in Waziristan; 
Shekh Budin (4516 ft.), in the small range; Sikaram (15,621 ft.) 
in the Safed Koh; Istragh (18,000 ft.), Kachin (22,641 ft.) and 
Tirach Mir (25,426 ft.), in the Hindu Kush on the northern border 
of the Chitral agency; while the Kagan peaks in Hazara district 
run from 10,000 ft. to 16,700 ft. 

Rivers. — With the exception of the Kunhar river, which flows 
down the Kagan valley to the Jhelum, the whole drainage of the 
province eventually finds its way into the Indus. The Indus enters 
the province between tribal territory and Hazara district. After 
leaving Hazara it flows in a southerly direction between the Punjab 
and the North-West Frontier Province, till it enters Mianwali 
district of the Punjab, from which it emerges to form again the 
eastern boundary of the province. From the east it is fed by three 
or four rivers of Hazara district (see Indus). At Attock the Kabul 
river brings down to the Indus the whole drainage of Kafiristan, 
Chitral, Panjkora, Swat and Peshawar district (see Kabul River). 
The Kurram river rises in the southern slopes of the Safed Koh, 
and after leaving the Kurram valley passes through the Kohat hills 
and enters Bannu district. Three miles below Lakki it is joined by 
the Tochi or Gambela, which carries the drainage of North Waziristan. 
The Kurram then empties itself into the Indus. From this point 
until it leaves the province the Indus receives no tributary of any 
importance. The Gomal river drains a large area of central Afghan- 
istan and forms the most important povindah (or Kafila) route on the 
frontier. 

The Pathan Races. — The North-West Frontier Province as 
now constituted may be described as the country of the Pathans 
(q.v.). The true Pathan is possibly of Indian extraction. But 
around this nucleus have collected many tribes of foreign origin. 
The whole have now become blended by the adoption of a common 
language, but remain tribally distinct; all alike have accepted 
Islam, and have invented traditions of common descent which 
express their present association. For centuries these tribes 
maintained their independence in the rugged hills which flank 
the present kingdom of Afghanistan. In the 15th century 
they began to settle in the plains. The 16th century saw the 
Pathan tribes established in their present homes. The spirit 
of independence which always characterized them soon brought 
them into collision with the Mogul empire. In the 17th century, 
after a long struggle, the settlers in the plains wrested from 
Aurangzeb terms which left them almost as independent as 
their brothers in the hills. The invasion in 1738 of Nadir Shah, 
who traversed the province from Peshawar to Dera Ismail Khan. 
is a landmark in the history of the frontier. From his death to 
the rise of Ranjit Singh, the frontier districts remained an 
appendage of the Durani empire. Little control was exercised 
by the rulers of Kabul, and the country was administered by 
local chiefs or Afghan Sirdars very much as they pleased. The 
Sikh invasions began in 1818, and from that date to the annexa- 
tion by the British government the Sikhs were steadily making 
themselves masters of the country. After the Second Sikh War, 
by the proclamation of the 29th of March 1849, the frontier 
districts were annexed by the British government. From that 
time until the creation of the North- West Frontier Province the 
settled districts formed part of the Punjab, while the independent 
tribes were controlled at different times by the Punjab govern- 
ment, and the government of India. Their turbulence still 
continued, and since 1849 they have been the object of over 
fifty punitive expeditions. The chief tribes, under the political 
control of the N.W. Frontier agency, besides Chitralis and 
Bajouris, are the Utman Khel, Yusafzais, Hassanzais, Mohmands, 
Afridis, Jowakis, Mullagoris, Orakzais, Zaimukhts, Chamkannis, 
Khattaks, Bangashes, Turis, Waziris, Battannis (Bhitanis) 
and ■ Sheranis. These tribes are referred to under separate 
headings. 

Creation of the Province. — The North-West Frontier Province 
differs from the older provinces of India in having been artifici- 
ally built up out of part of a previous province together with 
new districts for a definite admim'strative purpose. The proposal 
to make the frontier districts into a separate province, ad- 
ministered by an officer of special experience, dates back to the 
viceroyalty of Lord Lytton, who, in a famous minute of the 
22nd of April 1877, said: — 

" I believe that our North-West Frontier presents at this moment 
a spectacle unique in the world; at least I know of no other spot 
where, after 25 years of peaceful occupation, a great civilized power 
has obtained so little influence over its semi-savage neighbours, 
and acquired so little knowledge of them, that the country within a 
day's ride of its most important garrison is an absolute terra incognita, 
and that there is absolutely no security for British life a mile or two 
beyond our border.*' 

The result of this minute was that a frontier commissionership, 
including Sind, was sanctioned by the home government, and 
Sir Frederick (afterwards Lord) Roberts had been designated 
as the first Commissioner, when the outbreak of the Second 
Afghan War caused the project to be postponed. It was after- 
wards shelved by Lord Ripon. Twenty-three years elapsed 
before the idea was revived and successfully brought to com- 
pletion by Lord Curzon, whose scheme was on a more modest 
scale than Lord Lytton's. It omitted Sind altogether, and con- 
fined the new province to the Pathan trans-Indus districts 
north of the Gomal. The purpose of the change was to subject 
all the independent tribes from Chitral to the Gomal Pass to 
the control of a single hand, and to ensure a firm and continuous 
policy in their management. The administration of the province 
is conducted by a chief Commissioner and Agent to the Governor- 
General. 

Population. — In the census of 1901 the operations were extended 
for the first time to the Kurram Valley and the Sherani country, 
trans-frontier territories containing a population of 66,628 
souls, which had not been previously enumerated. The military 
cantonments and posts in Malakand, Dir, Swat and Chitral 
were also enumerated, as were those in the Tochi Valley (the 
Northern Waziristan Agency) and in the Gomal (the Southern 
Waziristan Agency), the former figures being included in the 
census returns of Bannu district, and those of the latter in the 
returns of Dera Ismail Khan. The total population of the 
province was 2,125,480; but this figure omits the great majority 
of the frontier tribes. The province is almost wholly agricultural. 
The urban population is only one-eighth of the total, and shows 
no tendency to increase. There are no large industries to attract 
the population to the towns; these, except Peshawar and Dera 
Ismail Khan, are either expansions of large agricultural villages 
or bazaars which have grown up round the many cantonments 
of the province. The great majority of the population are 
Pathan by race and Mahommedan by religion. The predominant 
language is Pushtu (q.v.). The conquered strata of the popu- 
lation speak servile Indian dialects, called Hindki in the 
north and Jatki in the south, while Gujari is spoken by the 
large Gujar population in the hills of Hazara and north of 
Peshawar. 

Crops and Climate. — The area under cultivation represents an 
average of 1*3 acres per head of the total, and of nearly 1-5 acres 
per head of the rural population. The limit of profitable cultivation 
has almost been reached. It is therefore from an improvement in 
the methods of agriculture rather than to an extension of the area 
under cultivation that recourse must be had to supply the needs of a 
rapidly increasing population. The Pathan, however, is a slovenly 
cultivator and slow to adopt any new methods which involve 
increased effort. > The principal crops are — in the cold weather, 
maize and bajra; in the spring, wheat, barley and gram. Rice and 
sugar-cane are largely grown on the irrigated lands of Hazara, 
Peshawar and Bannu districts, and the well and canal irrigated 
tracts of Peshawar district produce fine crops of cotton and tobacco. 
In the trans-border agencies the valleys of the Swat, Kurram and 
Tochi rivers yield abundant rice crops. The province is mainly a 
mountainous region, but includes the Peshawar valley and the broad 
riverain tract of the Indus in Dera Ismail Khan district. The 
climatic conditions are hence extremely diversified. Dera Ismail 
Khan district is one of the hottest areas in the Indian continent, 
while over the mountain region to the north the weather is temperate 
in the summer and intensely cold in the winter. The air is generally 
dry, and hence the daily and annual range of temperature is fre- 
quently very large. There arc two seasons of rainfall over the 
province: the monsoon season, when supplies of moisture are brought 
up by the ocean winds from the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal ; 
and the winter season, when storms advancing eastwards from Persia 
and the Caspian districts occasion winds, widespread rain and snow- 
fall. Both sources of supply are precarious, and instances are not 
infrequent of the almost entire failure of either the winter or the 
summer rainfall. 

Irrigation. — Canals are the main source of irrigation in the province, 
and fall under three heads: (1) Private canals in the various districts, 
the property of the people and managed on their behalf; (2) the 
Michni Dilazak and Shabkadar branch in Peshawar, constructed by 
the district board, which receives water rates; and (3) the Swat 
and Kabul river canals, which were constructed by and are the 
property of government, and are managed by the irrigation depart- 
ment. 

About 20% of the cultivated area is irrigated by canals, 2% by 
wells and 3% by perennial^ streams. Throughout the province the 
area in which well-cultivation is possible is extremely limited, and 
the field has already been covered. In Kohat and Hazara any 
considerable extension of canal irrigation is out "of the question, 
but in the remaining districts much can still be done to promote 
irrigation. 

Railways. — The railways of the province are mostly intended in 
the first instance for strategic purposes. The main line of the North- 
western railway runs from Rawalpindi to Peshawar, whence it 
has been extended 9 m. to Jamrud at the entrance to the Khyber 
Pass. From Nowshera a frontier light line, involving a break of 
gauge, is carried to Dargai at the foot of the Malakand Pass. 
From Rawalpindi again another branch extends to the Indus at 
Kushalgarh. A bridge has been built at this point, and the railway 
continued through Kohat to Thai at the entrance of the Kurram 
valley. • 

See North-West Frontier Province Gazetteer (Calcutta, 1908); 
Sir Thomas Holdich, The Indian Borderland (1901); Paget and 
Mason, Record of Frontier Expeditions (1884). (T. H. H.*), 

NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES. The North-West Territory 
was at first a general name given to all the districts of British 
North America lying N.W. of the St Lawrence basin. In the 
British North America Act of 1867 provision was made for the 
admission' to Canada of " Rupert's Land and the North-West 
Territory." Manitoba was formed out of this district in 1870. 
The territory remaining was then called the " North-West 
Territories," and until other arrangements were made was to be 
under the governor of Manitoba. In 1876 the district of Keewatin 
was established; in 1881 the limits of Manitoba were enlarged; 
and in 1882 four new districts — Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, 
Alberta and Athabasca — were organized. In 1905 the two first 
of these with some modification became theprovince of Saskatche- 
wan, and the two last the province of Alberta. The territories 
of Canada outside of the eight provinces and Yukon district of 
the mainland are now organized as the North-West Territories, 
and are under an administrator or acting governor. They include 
the districts of Keewatin, Ungava, Mackenzie and Franklin. 
These territories have an Indian population of about 8500, the 
Indians throughout the southern part being chiefly Chipewyans, 
or, as they are sometimes called, Tinn6. The northern parts are 
inhabited by Eskimo. In these territories a short hot summer 
is followed by a long cold winter with extremely low temperatures, 
the spirit thermometer at times showing 6o° to 65 F. below 
zero. The following observations may be quoted: — 

	Feet 
	above 
	Sea-level. 
	Mean Temperature,F. 
	Average 
	Precipitation, 
	Inches. 
	Summer. 
	Winter. 
	Norway House, Keewatin . 
	York Factory 
	Fort Simpson, 41 51' N. . 
	Fort Franklin, 65 12' N. . 
	710 
	400 
	500 
	48V 
	59-4° 
	5o-4° 
	12-6 
	-IO° 
	-17° 
	19-26 
	28-73 

With the exception of southern Keewatin and the district south 
of James Bay the animals of the North-West Territories are 
chiefly fur-bearing. Great herds of musk-oxen are found in 
Mackenzie, and vast flocks of ducks, geese and other migratory 
birds spend summer in the northern wilds. Except in southern 
Keewatin and the James Bay district the flora is decidedly 
northern, becoming Arctic in the far north. Forest trees grow 
small and ill formed. Sedges abound, exceeding grasses; 
mustards are abundant, and saxifrages plentiful. Mosses and 
lichens are numerous. 

The history of the north-west follows three different branches. 
(1) The story of Arctic exploration and the search for the North- 
West Passage, with a concentration of interest upon the name of 
Sir John Franklin, whose loss was followed by a great development 
of investigation in the Arctic regions; (2) the story of the fur trade, 
connected with the Hudson Bay forts, from the establishment of 
the first Charles Fort in 1669; (3) the story of immigration, the 
beginning of which is to be found in the coming of the Selkirk 
colonists, the real founders of Manitoba (q.v.), to Red river by way of 
Hudson Bay. 


NORTHWICH, a market town in the Northwich parliamentary 
division of Cheshire, England, 171 % m. N.W. of London, on the 
London and North-Western railway and the Cheshire lines. 
Pop. of urban district, 17,611. It lies in a low open valley at 
the confluence of the rivers Weaver and Dane, and is the centre 
of the principal salt-producing district in the United Kingdom. 
In its narrow and irregular streets many of the houses are 
strongly bolted to keep them secure from the subsidences which 
result not infrequently from the pumping of brine. Despite 
these precautions many accidents have occurred; some of the 
houses have sunk or stand at fantastic angles, and in 1892 a 
portion of the High Street, which had subsided below the level 
of the Weaver, had to be raised 6 ft. Both rock salt and white 
salt obtained by evaporation from brine are exported. The 
amount supplied by the whole district, which includes the 
neighbouring town of Winsford 6 m. south, is about 1,500,000 
tons annually. The white salt is shipped chiefly to America. 
The principal buildings are the church of St Helen, Witton, 
noted for its finely carved roof of the 17th century, a museum 
and free library and market house. The Verdin Park was 
presented to the town by Robert Verdin, M.P. for Northwich, 
in 1887. There is a considerable industry in the building of 
flat boats to convey salt to Liverpool, the river Weaver being 
navigable, and connected by a hydraulic lift, 1 m. from the 
town, with the Trent and Mersey Canal on a higher level. Rope- 
and brick-making, iron and brass-founding, chemical manu- 
factures, brewing and tanning, are also carried on. 


NORTON, CAROLINE ELIZABETH SARAH (1808-1877), 
afterwards Lady Stirling-Maxwell, English writer, was born in 
London in 1808. One of the three beautiful granddaughters of 
Richard Brinsley Sheridan, daughters of his son Thomas, the 
" three Graces " of London society in the reign of George IV., 
she began to write before she was out of her teens. Her two 
sisters Helen and Georgina became respectively Lady Dufferin 
and duchess of Somerset. Lady Dufferin described the sisters 
to Disraeli with characteristic modesty. " Georgey's the beauty," 
she said, " and Carry's the wit, and I ought to be the good one, 
but I am not." At the age of seventeen, Caroline published a 
merry satire, The Dandies 1 Rout, illustrated by herself, and full 
of girlish high spirits and wit. Her first essay m serious verse 
was made in 1829 with The Sorrows of Rosalie, the next in 1830 
with The Undying One, a version of the legend of the Wander- 
ing Jew. She made an unfortunate marriage in 1827 with 
the Hon. George Norton, brother of Lord Grantley. After 
three years of protests on her part and good promises 
on his, she had left his house for her sister's, had 
"condoned" on further good promises, and had 
returned, to find matters worse. The husband's 
persecutions culminated in 1836 in an action brought 
against Lord Melbourne for seduction of his wife, 
which the jury decided against Mr Norton without 
leaving the box. The case against Lord Melbourne 
was so weak that it was suggested that Norton 
was urged to make the accusation by Melbourne's political 
enemies, in the hope that the scandal would prevent him from 
being premier when the princess Victoria should succeed William 
IV. In 1853 legal proceedings between Mrs Norton and her 
husband were again entered on, because he not only failed to 
pay her allowance, but demanded the proceeds of her books. 
Mrs Norton made her own experience a plea for addressing 
to the queen in 1855 an eloquent letter on the divorce laws, 
and her writings did much to ripen opinion for changes in the 
legal status of married women. George "Meredith, in Diana of 
the Crossways, used her as the model for his " Diana." Mrs 
Norton was not a mere writer of elegant trifles, but was one 
of the priestesses of the " reforming " spirit; her Voice from 
the Factories (1836) was a most eloquent and rousing condemna- 
tion of child labour. The Dream, and other Poems appeared in 
1840. Aunt Carry's Ballads (1847), dedicated to her nephews 
and nieces, are written with charming tenderness and grace. 
Later in life she produced three novels, Stuart of Dunleath (185 1), 
Lost and Saved ( 1 863) , and Old Sir Douglas ( 1868) . Mrs Norton's 
last poem was the Lady of La Garaye (1862), her last publication 
the half-humorous, half-heroic story of The Rose of Jericho in 
1870. She died on the 15th of June 1877. Mr Norton died in 
1875; and Mrs Norton in the last year of her life married Sir 
W. Stirling-Maxwell. 

See The Life of Mrs Norton, by Jane G. Perkins (1909). 


NORTON, CHARLES BOWYER ADDERLEY. ist Baron 
(1814-1905), English politician, eldest son of Charles Clement 
Adderley (d. 1818), one of an old Staffordshire family, was born 
on the 2nd of August 1814, and inherited Hams Hall, Warwick- 
shire and the valuable estates of his great-uncle, Charles Bowyer 
Adderley, in 1826. He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, 
and in 1841 he became one of the members of parliament for 
Staffordshire, retaining his seat until 1878, when he was created 
Baron Norton. Adderley's official career began in 1858, when 
he served as president of the board of health and vice-president of 
the committee of the council on education in Lord Derby's 
short ministry. Again under Lord Derby he was under-secretary 
for the colonies from 1866 to 1868, being in charge of the act 
which called the Dominion of Canada into being, and from 1874 
to 1878 he was president of the board of trade. He died on the 
28th of March 1905. Norton was a strong churchman and 
especially interested in education and the colonies. In 1842 he 
married Julia (1820-1887) daughter of Chandos, ist Lord Leigh, 
by whom he had several sons. His eldest son Charles Leigh 
(b. 1846) became 2nd Baron Norton. Another son, James 
Granville Adderley (b. 1861)/ vicar of Saltley, Birmingham, 
became well. known as an advocate of Christian socialism. 

See W. S. Childc-Pemberton, The Life of Lord Norton (1909). 


NORTON, CHARLES ELIOT (1827-1008), American scholar 
and man of letters, was born at Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
on the 1 6th of November 1827. his father, Andrews Norton 
(1 786-1853) was a Unitarian theologian, and Dexter professor 
of sacred literature at Harvard; his mother was Catherine 
Eliot, Charles William Eliot, president of Harvard, being his 
cousin. Charles Eliot Norton graduated from Harvard in 1846, 
and started in business with an East Indian trading firm in 
Boston, for which he travelled to India in 1849. After a tour 
in Europe, he returned to America in 1851, and thenceforward 
devoted himself to literature and art. 

In 1881 Norton inaugurated the Dante Society, whose first 
presidents were Longfellow, Lowell and Norton. He translated 
the Vita Nuova (i860 and 1867) and the Divina Commedia 
(1 891-1892, 2 vols.). After work as secretary to the Loyal 
Publication Society during the Civil War, he edited from 1864- 
1868 the North American Review, in association with James 
Russell Lowell. In 1861 he and LoweJl helped Longfellow in 
his translation of Dante and in the starting of the informal 
Dante Club. In 1875 he was appointed professor of the history of 
art at Harvard, a chair which was created for him and which he 
held until he became emeritus in 1898. 'The Archaeological Insti- 
tute of America chose him to be the first president (1879-1890). 
From 1856 until 1874 Norton spent much time in travel and 
residence on the continent of Europe and in England, and it was 
during this period that his friendships began with Carlyle, Ruskin, 
Edward Fitz Gerald and Leslie Stephen, an intimacy which did 
much to bring American and English men of letters into close 
personal relation. Norton, indeed, had a peculiar genius for 
friendship, and it is on his personal influence rather than on 
his literary productions that his claim to remembrance mainly 
rests. From 1882 onward he confined himself to the study of 
Dante, his professorial' duties, and the editing and publication 
of the literary memorials of many of -his friends. In 1883 came 
the Letters of Carlyle and Emerson; in 1886, 1887 and 1888, 
Carlyle's Letters and Reminiscences; in 1894, the Orations and 
Addresses of George William Curtis and the Letters of Lowell. 
Norton was also made Ruskin's literary executor, and he 
wrote various introductions for the American " Brantwood " 
edition of Ruskin's works. His other publications include 
Notes of Travel and Study in Italy (1859), and an Historical 
Study of Church-building in the Middle Ages: Venice, Siena, 
Florence (1880). He organized exhibitions of^the drawings of 
Turner (1874) and of Ruskin (1879), for which he compiled 
the catalogues. 

He died on the 21st of October 1908 at " Shady-hill," the 
house where he was born. He bequeathed the more valuable 
portion of his library to Harvard. In 1862 he had married Miss 
Susan Sedgwick. He had the degrees of Litt.D. (Cambridge) 
and D.C.L. (Oxford), as well as the L.H.D. of Columbia and the 
LL.D. of Harvard and of Yale. 


NORTON, THOMAS (1532-1584), English lawyer, politician 
and writer of verse, was born in London in 1532. He was 
educated at Cambridge, and early became a secretary to the 
Protector Somerset. In 1555 he was admitted a student at the 
Inner Temple, and married Margery Cranmer, the daughter of 
the archbishop. From his eighteenth year Norton had begun 
to compose verse. We find him connected with Jasper Hey wood ; 
as a writer of " sonnets " he contributed to TottcVs Miscellany , 
and in 1560 he composed, in company with Sackville, the earliest 
English tragedy, Gorboduc, which was performed before Queen 
Elizabeth in the Inner Temple on the 18th of January 1561. 
In 1562 Norton, who had served in an earlier parh'ament as the 
representative of Gatton, became M.P. for Berwick, and entered 
with great activity into politics. In religion he was inspired 
by the sentiments of his father-in-law, and was in possession 
of Cranmer's MS. code of ecclesiastical law; this he permitted 
John Foxe to publish in 1 5 7 1 . He went to Rome on legal business 
in 1570, and from 1580 to 1583 frequently visited the Channel 
Islands as a commissioner to inquire into the^ status of these 
possessions. Norton's Calvinism grew with years, and towards 
the end of his career he became a rabid fanatic. His punishment 
of the Catholics, as their official censor from 1581 onwards, led 
to his being nicknamed " Rackmaster-General." At last his 
■turbulent puritanism made him an object of fear even to the 
English bishops; he was deprived of his office and thrown into 
the Tower. Walsingham presently released him, but Norton's 
health was undermined, and on the 10th of March 1584 he died 
in his house at Sharpenhoe, Bedfordshire. 

The Tragedie of Gorboduc was first published, very corruptly, 
in 1565, and, in better form, as The Tragedie of Feerex and 
Porrex, in 1570. Norton's early lyrics have in the main dis- 
appeared. The most interesting of his numerous anti-Catholic 
pamphlets are those on the rebellion of Northumberland and on 
the projected marriage of Mary Queen of Scots to the duke of 
Norfolk. Norton also translated Calvin's Institutes (1561) and 
Alexander NowelTs Catechism (1570). 

Gorboduc appears in various dramatic collections, and was separ- 
ately edited by W. D. Cooper (Shakespeare Soc. 1847), and by 
Miss Toulmin Smith in Volkmoller's Enghsche Sprach- und Liter atur- 
denkmale (1883). The best account of Norton, and his place in 
literary history, is that of Sidney Lee in his Dictionary of National 
Biography. (E. G.) 


NORWALK, a city of Fairfield county, Connecticut, U.S.A., 
on the Norwalk river, in the township of Norwalk, adjoining 
the city of South Norwalk in the same township, and 13 m. 
W.S.W. of Bridgeport. Pop. (1900) 6125 (1023 foreign-born and 
189 negroes); (1910) 6945; of the township (1900) 19,932; (1910) 
24,211. The city is served by the New York, New Haven & 
Hartford railroad, by interurban electric lines, and by steamboats 
to New York. The city has a green with several old churches 
and some fine elms, a public library, a hospital, a state armoury 
and a county children's home. The Norwalk Chapter of the 
Daughters of the American Revolution has erected here a 
drinking fountain in memory of Nathan Hale, who obtained in 
Norwalk his disguise as a Dutch school teacher and then started 
on his fatal errand to Long Island. Norwalk has some manu- 
factures, including woollen goods and typewriting machines; 
and there is some coasting trade, oysters especially being shipped 
from Norwalk. 

The site of the township was purchased from the Indians 
in 1640 by Roger Ludlow and Daniel Patrick, Ludlow giving 
six fathoms of wampum, six coats, ten hatchets, ten hoes, ten 
knives, ten scissors, ten Jew's harps, ten fathoms of tobacco, 
three kettles of six hands, and about ten looking-glasses for all ' 
the land between the Norwalk and Saugatuck rivers and extend- 
ing one day's walk N. from the Sound. The first settlement in the 
township was made in 1650 at what is now the village of East 
Norwalk by a small company from Hartford, and the township 
was incorporated in the next year. The village was burned by 
the British under Governor Tryon on the 12th of July 1779, and 
the chair in which it is alleged Tryon sat, on Grumman's Hill, 
as he watched the flames, has been kept as a relic. Norwalk 
was incorporated as a borough in 1836 and was chartered as a 
city in 1893. 

See CM. Selleck, Norwalk (Norwalk, 1896); and Norwalk after 
Two Hundred and Fifty Years, an Account of the Celebration of 
the 250th Anniversary of the Charter of the Town (South Norwalk 
1901). 


NORWALK, a city and the county-seat of Huron county, 
Ohio, U.S.A., about 55 m. W.S.W. of Cleveland. Pop. (1900) 
7074, including 762 foreign-born and 101 negroes: (19 10) 7858 
It is served by the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern, and the 
Wheeling & Lake Erie railways, and by interurban electric 
lines. It has a public library in which a small museum is main- 
tained by the Firelands Historical Society. The city is the 
centre of a rich agricultural district. Among its manufactures 
are machine-shop products (the Wheeling & Lake Erie has shops 
here), iron and steel, pianos and automobile fittings. 

Norwalk was settled in 18 17 and was named from Norwalk, 
Connecticut; it was incorporated as a town in 1829 and 
chartered as a city in 1S81. Huron county and Erie county 
immediately N. are the westernmost of the counties created 
from the " Western Reserve," and comprise the " Fire Lands " 
grant made in 1 792 by the state of Connecticut to the 
people of Greenwich, Fairfield, Danbury, Ridgefield, Norwalk, 
New Haven, East Haven and New London to indemnify 
them for their fire losses during the British expeditions in 
Connecticut under Governor Tryon in 1779 and Benedict 
Arnold in 1781. The Connecticut grantees were incorporated 
in 1803 as " the proprietors of the half-million acres of land 
lying south of Lake Erie." 