NORWAY (Norge), a kingdom of northern Europe, occupying 
the W. and smaller part of the Scandinavian peninsula. Its 
E. frontier marches with that of Sweden, except in the extreme 
N., where Norway is bounded by Russian territory. On the 
N., W., S. and S.E. the boundary is the sea — the Arctic Ocean, 
that part of the Atlantic which is called the Norwegian Sea, 
the North Sea and the Skagerrack successively. The S. extremity 
of the country is the island of Slettingen in 57 58' N., and the 
N. that of Kiiivskjaerodden, off the North Cape in 71 n' N. 
Of the mainland, the southernmost promontory is Lindesnaes, 
in 57° 59' N., while the northernmost is Nordkyn, in 7i°V N. 
The S. of the country, that is to say, the projection between the 
Skagerrack and the North Sea proper, lies in the same latitude 
as the N. of Scotland and Labrador, and the midland of Kam- 
chatka. The most - western island, Utvaer, lies off the mouth 
of the Sogne Fjord (4 30' E.), and the easternmost point of the 
country is within the Arctic lands, near Vardo (31 11' E). The 
direct length of Norway (S.W. to N.E.) is about 1100 m. The 
extreme breadth in the S. (about 6i° N.) is 270 m., but in the 
N. it is much less — about 60 m. on the average, though the 
Swedish frontier approaches within 6 m. of a head-branch of 
Ofoten Fjord, and the Russian within 19 m. of Lyngen Fjord. 
The length of the coast line is difficult to estimate; measured 
as an unbroken line it is nearly 1700 m., but including the fjords 
and greater islands it is set down as 1 2,000. The area is estimated 
at 1 24,495 sq. m. 

Physical Features. Relief. — The main mountain system 
of the Scandinavian peninsula hardly deserves its name of 
Kjolen 1 (the keel). It may rather be described as a plateau 
deprived of the appearance of a plateau, being on the one hand 
grooved by deep valleys, while on the other many salient peaks 
tower above its average level. Such peaks, during the later 
Glacial period, stood above the ice-field. Peaks and ridges 
were formed by the action of small glaciers cutting out each 
its circular hollow (botn) just as they still work on the remaining 
snow-fields. But where the power of the main ice-mass was at 
work, the characteristic rounded forms of base rock are seen, 
close above the sea along the coast, but even as high as 5000 ft. 
in some inland localities. The high plateau lies along the W. 
side of the peninsula, so that except in the S.E. Norway is 
mountainous throughout. Even the part excepted is hilly, 
but it partakes of the character of the long eastern or Swedish 
slope of the peninsula. Beyond the coast line their floors sink 
far below sea-level, and thus are formed the fjords and the belt 
of rugged islands which characterize almost the entire seaboard 
of Norway. Where Norway marches with Russia, a few heights 
exceed 3000 or even 4000 ft., but the land is not generally of 
great elevation. But from the point of junction with Swedish 
territory the mountains increase considerably in height. For a 
short distance, as far south as Lake Tome, the loftiest points 
lie within Norwegian territory, such as Jaeggevarre (6283 ft.), 
between Lyngen and Ulfs fjords, and Kiste Fjeld (5653 ft.) 
farther inland. Thereafter the principal heights lie approxi- 
mately along the crest-line of the plateau and within Swedish 
territory. Sulitelma, however (6158 ft.), lies on the frontier. 
Southward again the higher summits fall to Norway. S. of 
Bodo, Svartisen" (" the black ice "), a magnificent snow-field 
bordering the coast, and feeding many glaciers, culminates at 
5246 ft. Thereafter, Okstinderne or * Oxtinderne (6273 ft.), 
and the Store Borge Fjeld (5587 ft.) are the principal elevations 
as far as 64 N. A little S. of this latitude the so-called 
Trondhjem depression is well marked right across the central 
upland, the height of the mountains not often exceeding 4000 
ft., while the peaked form characteristic of the heights which 
rose clear of the glaciers of the later Glacial period is wanting. 
It is from this point too that Norwegian territory broadens 

	1 In Norwegian the definite article (when there is no epithet) is 
	added as a suffix to the substantive (masc. and fern, en, neuter et). 
	Geographical terms are similarly suffixed to names, thus Suldals- 
	vanlet, the lake Suldal. The commonest geographical terms are: 
	elv, river; vand, lake; fjeld, mountain or highland; 6, island; 
	dal, valley; ntes, cape; fos, waterfall; brm, glacier; vik, trig, bay; 
	tide, isthmus \ fjord. Aa is pronounced aw. 

so as to include not only the highest land in the peninsula, 
but a considerable part of the general E. and S.E. slope. The 
high plateau broadens and follows the S.W. sweep of the coast. 
Pursuing it S. the Dovre Fjeld is marked off by the valleys of 
the rivers Driva and Sundal, Laagen (or Laugen) and Rauma, 
and the fjords of the coastland of Nordmore. Here Snehaetta 
reaches a height of 7615 ft., and the Romsdal (the name under 
which the Rauma valley is famous among tourists) is flanked 
by many abrupt jagged peaks up to 6000 ft. high. The valley 
of the Laagen forms the upper part of Gudbrandsdal. East of 
this and S.E. of the Dovre is another, fjeld, Rondane, in which 
Hogronden rises to 6929 ft. South of the Otta valley is Jotunheim 
or Jotun Fjeld, a sparsely peopled, in parts almost inaccessible, 
district, containing the highest mountains in Scandinavia, 
Galdhopiggen reaching 8399 ft. On the seaward side of 
Jotunheim is Jostedalsbrae, a great snow-field in which Lodals- 
kaupen reaches a height of 6795 ft. South of Sogne Fjord 
(6i° N.) mountains between 5000 and 6000 ft. are rare; but in 
Hallingskarvet there are points about 6500 ft. high, and in the 
Hardanger Vidda (waste), a broad wild upland E. of Hardanger 
Fjord, Haarteigen reaches 6063 ft. The highland finally sinks 
towards the S. extremity of Norway in broken masses and short 
ranges of hills, separated by valleys radiating S.E., S. and W. 

Glaciers. — The largest glacier in continental Europe is Jostedals- 
brae, with an area of 580 sq. m., the snow-cap descending to 
4000 or 4500 ft. Several of its branches fall nearly to the sea, 
as the Boiumsbrae above the Fjaerland branch of Sogne Fjord. 
The largest branch is the Nigardsbrae. Skirting Hardanger 
Fjord, and nearly isolated by its main channel and two arms, 
is the great glacier of Folgefond (108 sq. m.). Two branches 
descending from the main mass are visited by many who penetrate 
the Hardanger — Buarbrae on the E., falling towards Lake 
Sandven above Odde, and Bondhusbrae on the W. The extreme 
elevation of the Folgefond in 5270 ft. Continuing N. other 
considerable snow-fields are those of Hallingskarvet, the Jotun- 
heim, Snehaetta in Dovre Fjeld, and Store Bcrge Fjeld at the 
head of the Namsen valley. Next follow Svartisen, second in 
extent to Jostedalsbrae (nearly 400 sq. m.), the Sulitelma snow- 
field and Jokel Fjelcl, between Kvaenang and Oxfjords. One 
glacier actually reaches the edge of Jokel Fjord, a branch of 
Kvaenang Fjord, so that detached fragments of ice float away 
on the water. This is the only instance of the kind in Norway. 
The Seiland snow-field, on Seiland island near Hammerfcst, 
is the most northerly neve in Europe. The snow-line in Norway 
is estimated at 3080 ft. in Seiland, 5150 ft. on Dovre Fjeld, 
and from 4100 to 4900 ft. in Jotunheim. The lowness of the 
snow-line adds to the grandeur of Norwegian mountains. 

Coast. — The flanks of the plateau fall abruptly to the sea 
almost throughout the coast-line, and its isolated fragments 
appear in the innumerable islands which fringe the skjwr- 
mainland. This island fringe, which has its counter- gaard or 
part in a modified form along the Swedish coast, is island* 
called in Norwegian the skjeergaard (skerry-fence, eace * 
pronounced shargoord). This fringe and the fjord-coast are most 
fully developed from Stavanger nearly as far as the North Cape. 
The channels within the islands are of incalculable value to 
coastwise navigation, -which is the principal means of communica- 
tion in Norway. The voyage northward from Stavanger may be 
made in quiet waters almost throughout. Only at rare intervals 
vessels must enter the open sea for a short distance, as off the 
port of Haugesund, or when rounding the promontory of the 
Stat or Statland, S. of Aalesund, passing the coast of Hustad- 
viken, S. of Christiansund, or crossing the mouth of some large 
fjord. At some points large steamers, following the carefully 
marked channel, pass in deep water between rocks within a 
few yards on either hand. Small ships and boats, fishing or 
trading between the fjord-side villages, navigate the ramifying 
" leads " {leder) in security. In some narrow sounds, however, 
the tidal current is often exceedingly strong. The largest island 
of the skjaergaard is Hindo of the Lofoten and Vesteraalen group. 
Its area is 860 sq. m. The number of islands is estimated at 
150,000 and their area at 8500 sq. m. Many of them are cf 
great elevation, especially the more northerly; thus the jagged 
peaks characteristic of Lofoten culminate at about 4000 ft. 
Hornelen, near the mouth of Nordfjord, 3000 ft. high, rises 
nearly sheer above the Frojf jord, and vessels pass close under the 
towering cliff. Torghatten (" the market hat "), N. of Namsos, 
is pierced through by a vast natural tunnel 400 ft. above the sea; 
and Hestmando (" horseman island "), on the Arctic circle, is 
justly named from its form. The dark blue waters of the inner 
leads and fjords are clouded, and show a milky tinge on the sur- 
face imparted by the glacier-fed rivers. Bare rock is the dominant 
feature of the coast and islands, save where a few green fields 
surround a farmstead. In the N., where the snow-line sinks low, 
the scenery at all seasons has an Arctic character. 

Christiania Fjord, opening from the N. angle of the Cattegat 
and Skagerrack, differs from the great fjords of the W. Its 
shores are neither so high nor so precipitous as theirs; 
it is shallower, and contains a great number of little 
islands. From its mouth, round Lindesnaes, and as far as the 
Bukken Fjord (Stavanger) there are many small fjords, while 
the skjaergaard provides an inner lead only intermittently. 
Immediately S. of Bukken Fjord, from a point N. of Egersund, 
the flat open coast of Jaederen, dangerous to shipping, fringing 
a narrow lowland abundant in peat-bogs for some 30 m., forms 
an unusual feature. Bukken Fjord is broad and island-studded, 
but throws off several inner arms, of which Lyse Fjord, near 
Stavanger, is remarkable for its extreme narrowness, and the 
steepness of its lofty shores. The Hardanger Fjord, penetrating 
the land for 114 m., is known to more visitors than any other 
owing to its southerly position; but its beauty is exceeded by 
that of Sogne Fjord and Nord Fjord farther N. Sogne is the 
largest and deepest fjord of all; its head is 136 m. from the sea, 
and its extreme depth approaches 700 fathoms. Stor Fjord 
opens inland from Aalesund, and one of its head branches, 
Geiranger Fjord, is among the most celebrated in Norway. 
Trondhjem Fjord, the next great fjord northward, which broadens 
inland from a narrow entrance, lacks grandeur, as the elevation 
of the land is reduced where the Trondhjem depression interrupts 
the average height of the plateau. The coast N. of Trondhjem, 
though far from losing its beauty, has not at first the grandeur 
of that to the south, nor are the fjords so extensive. The principal 
of these are Namsen, Folden and Vefsen, at the mouth of which 
is Alsten Island, with the mountains called Syv Sostre (Seven 
Sisters), and Ranen, not far S. of the Arctic circle. Svartisen 
sends its glaciers seaward, and the scenery increases in magnifi- 
cence. Salten Fjord, to the N. of the great snow-field, is con- 
nected with Skjerstad Fjord by three narrow channels, where 
the water, at ebb and flow, forms powerful rapids. The scenery 
N. of Salten is unsurpassed. The Lofoten and Vesteraalen 
islands are separated from the mainland by the Vest Fjord, which 
is continued inland by Ofoten Fjord. If these two be considered 
asonefjord, its length is about 175 m.,but the actual penetration 
of the mainland is little more than a fifth of this distance. The 
main fjords N. of Vesteraalen have a general northerly direction ; 
among them is Lyngen Fjord near Tromso, with high flanking 
cliffs and glaciers falling nearly to the sea. Alten Fjord is re- 
markable for the vegetation on its shores. From Lofoten N. 
there is a chain of larger islands, Senjen, Kvalo, Ringvadso, Soro, 
Stjerno, Seiland, Ingo and Magero. These extend to the North 
Cape, but hereafter the skjaergaard ends abruptly. The coast to the 
E. is of widely different character; flat mountain wastes descend 
precipitously to the sea without any islands beyond, save Vardo, 
with two low islets at the E. extremity of Norway. The fjords are 
broader in proportion to their length. The chief are Porsanger, 
Laxe and Tana, opening N., and Varanger opening E. N. of this 
fjord the land is low and the landscape monotonous; on the 
S. a few island and branch fjords break the line of the shore. 
, Stavanger Fjord has an extreme depth of 380 fathoms; 
Hardanger Fjord 355, Sogne Fjord 670, Nordfjord 340, Trond- 
hjem Fjord 300, Ranen Fjord 235, Vestfjord 340, Alten Fjord 225, 
and Varanger Fjord 230. Marine terraces are met with in the 
E. of the country, and near Trondhjem, at 600 ft. above sea-' 
level; and they are also seen at a slighter elevation at the heads 
of some western fjords. Moreover, at some points (as on the 
Jaederen coast) " giant kettles " may be observed close to sea- 
level, even below the level of high tide; and these glacial forma- 
tions indicate the greater elevation of the land towards the close 
of the Glacial epoch. Former beach-lines are most commonly 
to be observed in northern Norway (e.g. in Alten Fjord), and 
in some cases there are two lines at different altitudes. The land 
above the raised beach is generally bare and unproductive, 
and human habitation tends to confine itself in consequence to 
the lower levels. 

Hydrography. — In S.E. Norway there are long valleys, carrying 
rivers of considerable size, flowing roughly parallel but sometimes 
uniting as they approach the sea. The Glommen, rising N. of Roros 
in Aursund Lake, and flowing with a southerly curve parallel with the 
frontier for 350 m. to the Skagerrack, is the largest river in the 
Scandinavian peninsula. Its upper middle valley is called Osterdal, 1 
the richest timber district in Norway. Its drainage area is 16,000 
sq. m. Seven miles above its mouth it forms the fine Sarpsfos, and 
not far above this it traverses the large lake Oieren. A right bank 
tributary, the Vormen, has one of its sources (under the name of 
Laagen) in Lake Lesjekogen, which also drains in the opposite direc- 
tion by the Rauma. The stream, after watering Gudbrandsdal, 
enters Mjosen, the largest lake in Norway. It is & m. long, but, 
like most of the greater Norwegian lakes, has no great breadth. It 
has, however, an extreme depth of 1500 ft. The Drammen river, 
which enters a western arm of Christiania Fjord below the town 
of Drammen, is the common outlet of several large rivers. The 
Hallingdal river drains the valley of that name, and forms Lake 
Kroderen, which is connected with the Drammen river by the 
Snarum. A short distance above the junction the Drammen flows 
out of Lake Tyrifjord, 50 sq. m. in area, into which flow the united 
waters of the Rand, from the valley district of Valdres, and the 
Baegna. The whole basin of the Drammen has an area of 6600 sq. m. 
The rivers between Christiania Fiord and Lindesnaes preserve the 
characteristics of those of the Glommen and Drammen systems. 
They rise on the Hardanger Vidda or adjacent uplands. The most 
important are the Laagen (to be distinguished from the river of that 
name in Gudbrandsdal), draining the Numedal; the Skien, the 
Nid and the Otter. Lakes are very numerous, the chief, beyond 
those already named, being Nordsjo on the Skien river, Tinsjo in the 
same system, which receives the river Maan, famous as forming the 
Riukanfos (smoking fall) of 415 ft., and Nisservand on the Nid. 
The larger lakes lie, with a certain regularity, at elevations about 
400 ft. above the sea, and it is considered that their basins were the 
heads of fjords when the land lay at a lower level, and were formed 
during an earlier glacial period than the present fjords. The great 
Lake Faemund, lying E. of the Glommen valley and drained by the 
river of the same name, which becomes the Klar in Sweden, to which 
country it mainly belongs, is similar in type to the lakes of the 
northern highlands of Sweden. The streams of the coast of Jaederen 
reach the sea through sluggish channels, brown with peat. 

Not only do the valleys of the W. far surpass in beauty those of 
the S. and E., but they carry streams of much greater volume in 
proportion, owing to the heavier average rainfall of the \V. slope. 
The first to be noted is that of the Sand or Logen river, a brilliant, 
rapid stream, famous for its salmon-fishing, which debouches at 
Sand into Sands fjord. The valley which opens from Odde at the 
head of a branch (Sor fjord) of Hardanger Fjord, is noted as con- 
taining two of the finest waterfalls in Norway. The one, Lotefos 
(which is joined by the smaller Skarsfos), is a powerful cataract 
following a tortuous cleft. The other, Espelandsfos, is formed by a 
very small stream; it falls quite sheer and spreads out like a fine 
veil. The only other considerable river entering Hardanger Fjord 
is the Bjoreia, with its mouth at Vik in Eidfjord. On this stream is 
the magnificent Voringsfos. Lesser streams within the basin of the 
Hardanger form the Skjseggedal and several other beautiful falls. 
From Hardanger N. to Romsdal the streams of the \V. slope are 
insignificant, but there are several splendid valleys, such as the 
sombre Nzerodal, which descends to the Naero branch of Sogne 
Fjord, or the valleys which sink S. and N. from the Jostedalsbrse to 
the head branches of Sogne Fjord and Nordfjord respectively. 
Above those of Nordfjord is a series of lakes, Olden, Loen and 
Stryn, whose milky waters are supplied almost directly from the 
Jostedal glaciers, while above Eidsfjord a corresponding trough 
contains Lake Hornindal. The next important valley is the Romsdal, 
the stream of which, the Rauma, forms the \V. outlet of Lake 
Lesjekogen, as the Laagen forms the E. This lake, which lies 201 1 ft. 
above sea-level, is the most remarkable example of an indefinite 
watershed to be found in S. Norway. N. from Romsdal the Driva 
debouches into Sundals Fjord, while the Orkla, draining Orkedal, the 
Gula draining Guldal, and the Nea or Nid, draining Lake Selbu, and 

	1 The middle and upper parts of many valleys in Norway are 
	known by different names from those of the rivers which water them, 
	and such names may extend in common usage over the district on 
	either side of the valley. 

forming the Lerfos, enter Trondhjem Fjord from the S., and range in 
length from 70 to 100 m. The Stjordal, a beautiful wooded valley, 
leads up from the fjord to the lowest pass over the Trondhjem 
depression (at Storlien), and is followed by the railway from 
Trondhjem into Sweden. 

N. of Trondhjem Fjord, in spite of the close proximity of the 
mountains to the W. coast, several considerable rivers are found, 
flowing generally about N.E. or S.W..in valleys nearly parallel to the 
coast. Such are the Namsen (85 m. in length) and the Vefsen, dis- 
charging into Namsen Fjord and Vefsen Fjord respectively, and the 
Dunderland, flowing into Ranen Fjord. In the basin of the same 
fjord is the short Ros river,which drains Ros Vand, second in extent 
of the Norwegian lakes. In the extreme N. f where the coastward 
slope is longer, there are such large rivers as the Alten, 98 m. long, 
discharging into the fjord of that name, and the Tana, also giving 
name to the fjord into which it flows, and forming a great part of the 
Russo-Norwegian frontier. It is 180 m. long, and drains an area of 
4000 sq. m. 

Though the lakes of Norway arenot comparable with those of 
Sweden as regards either number or size, they are very numerous and 
are estimated to cover somewhat less than one-fortieth of the total 
area. 

Glacial Action. — While the coast is considered to owe its fjords and 
islands to the work of former great glaciers, the results are even more 
patent inland. The actual tracks ofthe old glaciers are constantly to 
be traced. Nowhere are the evidences of glacial action better 
illustrated than in the barren tract behind the low coastal belt ol 
Jaederen. Here are vast expanses of almost naked rock, often riven 
and piled up in fantastic forms; numerous small lakes or bogs occupy 
the rock basins, and vast numbers of perched blocks are seen, 
frequently poised in remarkable positions. The great valleys of 
Norway are of U-section and exhibit the irregular erosive action of 
the glaciers, as distinct from the regular action of the rivers. If a 
main glacier, after working steadily in the formation of its trough for 
a considerable distance, be imagined to receive an accretion of power 
at a certain point, it will begin from that point to erode more deeply. 
The result of such action is seen in the senes of ledges over which the 
main rivers of Norway plunge in falls or rapids. 

Geology. — Norway consists almost entirely of Archaean and Lower 
Palaeozoic rocks, imperfectly covered by glacial and other recent 
deposits. The whole of the interval between the Devonian and the 
Glacial periods is represented, so far as is known, only by a small 
patch 01 Jurassic beds upon the island of Ando. An archaean zone 
stretches along the W. coast from Bergen to Hammerfest, interrupted 
towards the N., by overlying patches of Palaeozoic deposits. Gneiss 
predominates, but other crystalline rocks occur ^ subordinately. 
The Lofoten Islands consist chiefly of eruptive granite, syenite and 
gabbro. S. of a line drawn from the head of the Hardanger Fjord to 
Lake Miosen is another great Archaean area. Here again gneiss and 
granite form the greater part of the mass, but in Telemarken there are 
also conglomerates, sandstones and clay-slates which are believed to 
be Archaean. Between these two Archaean areas the Lower Palae- 
ozoic rocks form a nearly continuous belt which follows approxi- 
mately the watershed of the peninsula and extends from Bergen and 
Stavanger on the S. to the North Cape and Vardo in the N. They 
occur also as a broad strip inlaid in the Archaean floor, from the 
Christ iania Fjord northward to Lake M josen. A line drawn from the 
Nase to the North Cape coincides roughly with a marked change in 
the character and structure of the Palaeozoic beds. East of this line 
even the Cambrian beds are free from overfolding, overthrusting and 
regional metamorphism. They lie flat upon the Archaean floor, or 
have been faulted into it in strips, and they are little altered except 
in the neighbourhood of igneous intrusions. W. of the line the 
rocks have been folded and metamorphosed to such an extent 
that it is often difficult to distinguish the Palaeozoic rocks from the 
Archaean. They form in fact a mountain chain of ancient date 
similar in structure to the Alps or the Himalayas. t The relations of 
thetwo areas have been studied by A. E. Tornebohm in the Trondhjem 
region, and he has shown that the western mass has been pushed over 
the eastern upon a great thrust-plane. The relations, in fact, are 
similar to those between the Dalradian schists of the Scottish 
Highlands and the Cambrian beds of the W. coast of Sutherland. 
In Scotland, however, it is the eastern rocks which have been pushed 
over the western. Corresponding with the difference in structure 
between the E. and the W. regions there is a certain difference in the 
nature of the deposits themselves. In the Christiania district the 
Cambrian, Ordovician and Silurian beds consist^ chiefly of shales and 
limestones. Farther north sandstones predominate, and especially 
the Sparagmite, a felspathic sandstone or arkose at the base of the 
Cambrian ; but the deposits are still sedimentary. In the Trondhjem 
district, on the other hand, belonging to the folded belt, basic tuffs 
and lavas are interstratificd with the normal deposits, showing that 
in this region there was great volcanic activity during the early 
part of the Palaeozoic era. In both the E. and the W. region the 
Devonian is probably represented by a few patches of red sandstone, 
in which none but obscure remains of fossils have yet been found. 
It may be noted here that in the extreme N. of Norway, E. of the 
North Cape, there is a sandstone not unlike the Sparagmite of the S., 
which is said by Reusch to contain ice-worn pebbles and to rest upon 
a striated pavement of Archaean rocks. 

	XIX. 26 

The Mesozoic era is represented only by the sandy deposits with 
seams of lignite which occur on the island of Andoen in the Vester- 
aalen. They contain remains of plants and have been correlated 
with the Lower Oolite of Great Britain. No Tertiary beds have been 
found, but Pleistocene deposits of various kinds are met with. The 
evidences of ice action during the Glacial Period are conspicuous 
over the whole country and are similar to those in other glaciated 
regions. But the most remarkable features produced in recent 
geological times arethe terraces which appear as if ruled on the sides 
of the valleys and fjords. They are partly platforms cut in the solid 
rock and partly accumulations of gravel and sand like a modern 
beach, and they were evidently formed by the action of waves. 
Some of them contain marine shells of living species and mark the 
former position of the sea-level ; but others are of more doubtful 
origin and may indicate the shores of lakes formed by the damming 
of the lower part of the fjords by means of glaciers, as in the case 
of the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy. They occur at various levels, 
and have been observed as high as 3000 ft. above the sea. 

No volcanic rocks of modern date are known in Norway, but great 
intrusions of igneous rock took place in early geological times. 
Amongst them may be mentioned the gabbro of the Jotunfjeld, and 
the elaeolite syenites and associated rocks of the Christiania region. 
The latter form the subject of a valuable series of memoirs by 
Brogger, who shows that they have all been derived from a single 
magma, and that the differentiation of this magma led to the pro- 
duction of several different types of rock. (P. La.) 

Meteorology. — The most powerful influence on the climate of 
Norway is that of the warm drift across the Atlantic Ocean from the 
SAV. The highest mean annual temperature in Norway Temo€ra 
is found on the S. and W. coasts, where it ranges from . ** 
44-5° to 45-5° F., and the lowest is found at Karasjok and 
Kautokeino, lying at elevations of 430 and 866 ft. respectively in 
Finmarken, near the Russian frontier. Here the mean temperature 
is 26*4°, while at Vardo\ on the north coast, it is 33°. At RSros 
(2067 ft.) at the head of the Glommen valley, and at Fjeldberg 
(3268 ft.) in the upper HalHngdal, the mean annual temperature is 
31 . The longest winter is found in the interior of Finmarken, 243 
days with a mean temperature below 32 ° being recorded at 
Kautokeino, contrasted with 205 at Vardo. In the S. uplands (as at 
Fjeldberg) there is an average of 200 such days, and at Christ iania 
about 120. On the S.W. coast there is no day of which the mean 
temperature falls below 32 ; the most westerly insular stations, 
however, such as Utsire and Skudeness offBukken Fjord, record frost 
during some part of 60 days. The lowest winter average temperature 
is found in a centre of cold in the N. which extends over Swedish and 
Russian territory as well as Norwegian. The Norwegian station 
of Karasjok, within it, records 4 during December, January and 
February, and in this area there have aiso been observed the extreme 
minima of temperature in the country, e.g. 60-5° below zero at 
Karasjok. The contrast with the S.W. coast may be continued. 
Here at some of the island stations, the coldest month, February, 
has an average about 3£°, and the lowest temperature recorded at 
Ona near Chnstiansund is 10-5°. It may be noted here that in several 
cases the lower-lying inland stations^ in the south show a distinctly 
lower winter temperature than the higher in the immediate vicinity. 

Thus the average for Roros (2067 ft.), 13 , contrasts with 11 ° for 
Tonset; at Listad in Gudbrandsdal (969 ft.) it is 16-5°, but at Jerkin 
in the Dovre Fjeld (3160 ft.) it is 17-5 . The summer is hottest in 
S.E. Norway (Christiania, July, 62-5 ). On the other hand, the lowest 
summer average in the interior of Finmarken is not less than 53*5° 
in July; but at Vardo it is only 48° in August, usually the warmest 
month on this coast. In the lofty inland tracts of the S.E. the July 
temperature ranges, from 59 ° in the valleys, to as low as 49 at the 
high station of Jerkin. The interior having a warm summer and a 
cold winter, and the coast a cool summer and a mild winter, the 
annual range of temperature is remarkably greater inland than on the 
coast. 

An important result of the warm Atlantic drift is that the fjords 
are not penetrated by the cold water from the lower depths of the 
outer ocean, and in consequence are always ice-free, except in 
winters of exceptional severity in the innermost parts of fjords, and 
along shallow stretches of coast. 

The sun is above the horizon at the North Cape continuously from 
the 12th of May to the 29th of July, and at Bodo, not far from the 
Arctic circle, from the 3rd of June to the 7th of July. 
,, * .. Even at Trondhjem there is practically full daylight from 
midnight the 23rd Q f May t0 the 20th f j u j v> £ yen j n ^ extreme 
*""' S. of Norway there is no darkness from the end of April 
to the middle of August. In winter, on the other hand, the sun does 
not rise above the horizon at the North Cape from the 18th of 
November, to the 23rd of January, and at Bodo from the 15th to the 
27th of December. There is only a twilight at midday. In the 
extreme S. the sun is above the horizon for 6| hours at mid-winter. 

The prevailing winter winds are from the land seaward, while the 
Winds system is reversed in summer. The winds in Norway 
may therefore be roughly classified according to locality 
thus : — 

	Winter . 
	Summer . 
	South-east Coast 
	(Skagerrack). 
	N.E. 
	, S.W. to W. 
	West Coast. 
	S. 
	N. 
	North. 
	S.W. 
	N. 

The force of the wind is greater in winter on the coast ; inland, on 
the contrary, the # winter is normally calm ; and at all seasons, on the 
average, the periods of calm are longer inland than on the coast. 
The average annual number of stormy days, however, ranges from 
ten to twenty on the S. coast, from forty-five to sixty-two on the 
coast of Finmarken, and sixty to seventy at Ona; whereas in the 
interior of Finmarken the average number is four, while in the S. 
inland districts stormy days are rare. December and January are 
the stormiest months. Hailstones are rare and seldom destructive. 
Thunderstorms are not frequent. They reach a maximum average 
of ten annually in the Christiania district. 

The number of days on which rain or snow falls is greatest on the 
coast from Jaederen to Vardo, least in the S.E. districts and the 
interior of Finmarken. At the North Cape, in Lofoten, and along 
the W. coast between the Stad and Sogne Fjord, precipitation occurs 
on about 200 days in the year, although by contrast in the inner part 
of Sogne Fjord there is precipitation only on 121 days. On Dovie 
Fjeld and the S.E. coast the average is about 100 days. Snowfall 
occurs least frequently in the S. (e.g. at Mandal, 25 snowy days out 
of 1 16 on which precipitation occurs), increasing to 50 at Christiania, 
or Dovre Fjeld, and about the mouth of Trondhjem Fjord, to 90 at 
Vardo, and to 100 at the North Cape. From Vardo to the Dovre 
Fjeld and in the upland tracts, snow occurs at least as frequently as 
rain. Snowfall has been recorded in all months on the coast as far 
S. as Lofoten. The amount of precipitation is greatest on the coast, 
where, at certain points on the mainland between Bukken Fjord and 
Nordfjord, an annual average of 83 in. is reached or even exceeded. 
On the outer islands there is a slight decrease ; inland the decrease is 
rapid and great. In Dovre Fjeld a minimum of 12 in. is found. 
In the extreme S. of the country the average is 39 in., N. of Trondhjem 
Fjord 53 in. are recorded, and there is a well-marked maximum of 
59 in. at Svolvaer in Lofoten, N. of which there is a diminution along 
the coast to 26 in. at the North Cape. In the northern interior a 
minimum of 16 in. is recorded. Strongly marked local variations are 
observed. 

The amount of cloudiness is on the whole great. The coast of 
Finmarken has over three cloudy days to one clear day; in the 
interior of the country clear and cloudy days are about equally 
divided. Fog is most frequent on the W. and N. W. coasts in summer ; 
on the S.E. coast in winter.^ In winter a frosty fog often occurs about 
the heads of the fjords during severe cold or with a breeze from the 
land. 

Flora. — The forests of Norway consist chiefly of conifers. The 
principal forest regions are the S.E. and S. Here, in the Trondhjem 
district, and in Nordland there are extensive forests of pine and fir. 
In the coastal and fjord region of the W. the pine is the only conifer- 
ous forest tree, and forests are of insignificant extent. In S. Norway 
the highest limit of conifers is from 2500 to 3000 ft. above sea- 
level; in the inland parts of the Trondhjem region it is from 1600 to 
2000 ft. (though on the coast only from 600 to 1200) ; farther N. it 
falls to 700 ft. about 70 N. The birch belt reaches 3000 to 3500 ft. 
Next follow various species of willows,and the dwarf birch (betula 
nana)^ and last of all, before the snow-line, the lichen belt, in which 
the reindeer moss (cladonia rangiferina) is always conspicuous. A 
few trees of the willow belt sometimes extend close up to the snow- 
line. In the S. and less elevated districts the lowest zone of forests 
includes the ash, elm^ lime, oak, beech and black alder; but the 
beech is rare, flourishing only in the Laurvik district. The snow 
ranunculus and the Alpine heather are abundant. The Dovre Fjeld 
is noted as the district in which the Arctic flora may be studied in 
greatest variety and within comparatively narrow limits. On the 
coastal banks the marine flora is very finely developed. 

Fauna. — The great forests are still the haunt of the bear, the 
lynx, and the wolf. Bears are found chiefly in the uplands N. of 
Trondhjem, in the Telemark and the W. highlands, but the cutting 
of forests has limited their range. The wolves decreased very 
suddenly in S. Norway about the middle of the 19th century, 
probably owing to disease, but are still abundant in Finmarken, and 
the worst enemy of the herds of tame reindeer. The elk occurs in the 
eastern forests, and northward to Namdal and the Vefsen district. 
The red deer is confined chiefly to the W. coast districts ; its principal 
haunt is the island of Hitteren, off the Trondhjem Fjord. On the 
high fields are foundthe wild reindeer, glutton, lemming and the fox 
(which is of wide distribution). The wild reindeer has decreased, 
though large tame herds are kept in some parts, especially in the N. 
The lemming is noted for its curious periodic migrations ; at such 
times vast numbers of these small animals spread over the country 
from their upland homes, even swimming lakes and fjords in their 
journeys. They are pursued by beasts and birds of prey, and even 
the reindeer kill them for the sake of the vegetable matter they 
contain. Hares arevery common all over Norway up to the snow- 
line. The beaver still occurs in the Christiansand district. 

Game birds are fairly abundant in most districts. The most 
notable are the two sorts of rype, the skov or dal type (willow grouse, 
lagopus albus) and the fjeld type (lagopus alpina). Black . » 
grouse are widely distributed; hazel grouse are found < ' * 
mainly in the pine forests of the E. and N., as are capercailzie. 
Woodcock and snipe are fairly common. The partridge is an 
immigrant from Sweden, and occurs principally in the E. and S.E. 
A severe winter occasionally almost exterminates it. A very large 
proportion of the Norwegian avifauna consists of geese and ducks, 
various birds of prey, golden plover, &c. These birds, at the autumn 
migration, leave by three well-defined routes — one from Finmarken 
into Finland, one by the Christiania valley, and one by the W. coast, 
where they congregate in large numbers on the lowlands of Jaederen. 
The Lapland bunting and snow bunting (plectrophanes laponica and 
nivalis), the snowy owl (mgetea scan&iaca) and rough-legged buzzard 
(archibuteo lagopus) and sea-birds are exceedingly numerous. In 
some localities such birds as the puffin and kittiwake form great 
colonies (fugleberge, bird cliffs). 

The common seal is very frequent ; and arctic seals and occasion- 
ally the walrus visit the northern coasts; among these the harp seal 
(phoca groenlandica) is believed to be particularly de- 
structive to the fisheries. These last are of great import- 
ance; a large number of the best food-fisheries occur 
along the coasts, including cod, herring, mackerel, coal-fish, &c. 
The basking shark was formerly of some economic importance ; the 
Japanese shark, a strictly local variety, also occurs in the neighbour- 
hood of Vardo. Various small species of whales visit the coast; 
among these the lesser rorqual may be mentioned, as an antique 
method of hunting it with bow and arrows is still practised in the 
neighbourhood of Bergen. In the fjords many invertebrates as well 
as fish are found. Of fresh-water fish the salmonidae are by far the 
most important. Next to these, perch, pike, gwyniad and eel are 
most common. 

As regards insect life, Norway may be divided into three areas, the 
S. being richer than the W„ while the N. is distinct from either in the 
number of peculiarly arctic insects. 

Sport. — Norway is much frequented by British anglers. Moderate 
rod-fishing for trout is to be obtained in many parts. But most of 
the owners of water rights have a full appreciation of the value of 
good fishing to sportsmen, especially when netting rights are given 
up for the sake of rod-fishing. The same applies to good shooting. 
Foreigners may not shoot without a licence, the cost of which is 100 
kroner (£5:11 : o) whether on crown lands or on private properties, 
whose owners always possess the shooting rights. 

	Marine 
	fauna* 

Population. — The resident population of Norway in 1000 
was 2,221,477. The Table shows the area and population of 
each of the administrative divisions {ami, commonly translated 
" county ")• Norway is, as a whole, the most thinly populated 

	Amter. 
	Population 
	1900. 
	Area in 
	sq. m. 
	Southern — 
	Smaalenene .... 
	Akershus .... 
	Christiania (city) . 
	Buskerud .... 
	Jarlsberg and Laurvik . 
	Bratsbcrg .... 
	Nedenes 
	Lister and Mandal . 
	South-eastern (inland) — 
	Hedemarken 
	Christians .... 
	Western — 
	Stavanger .... 
	South Bergenhus . 
	Bergen (city) . . 
	North Bergenhus . 
	Romsdal .... 
	South Trondhjem . 
	Northern — 
	North Trondhjem . 
	Nordland .... 
	Tromso 
	Finmarken .... 
	136,167 
	116,896 
	229,101 
	H2,743 
	101,003 
	98,298 
	75.925 
	78,259 
	126,703 
	116,280 
	125.658 
	132.687 
	88,214 
	136.519 
	134.718 
	83.449 
	150,637 
	72,966 
	33.387 
	1,600 
	2.054 
	6-5 
	5.789 
	896 
	5.863 
	3.608-5 
	2,804 
	10,618 
	9.790 
	3.530-5 
	6,024.5 
	5'5 
	7.130 
	5.786 
	7.182 
	8,788.5 
	14.513 
	10,131 
	18,291 

of the political divisions of Europe. It may be noted for the 
sake of comparison that the density of population in the most 
sparsely populated English county, Westmorland, is about 
equalled by that in Smaalenene amt (85 per sq! m.), and con- 
siderably exceeded in Jarlsberg and Laurvik amt (112-7 per 
sq. m.), but is not nearly approached in any other Norwegian 
county. The two counties named are small and lie almost 
wholly within the coastal strip along the Skagerrack, which, 
with the coast-lands about Stavanger, Haugesund, Bergen 
and Trondhjem, the outer Lofoten Islands and the land about 
Lake Mjosen, are the most thickly populated portions of the 
country, the density exceeding 50 persons per sq. m. A vast 
area practically uninhabited, save in the N. by nomadic Lapps, 
reaches from the northmost point of the Norwegian frontier as 
far S. as the middle of Hedemarken, excepting a markedly more 
populous belt across the Trondhjem depression. Thus of the 
counties, Finmarken is the least thickly populated (i-8 per 
sq. m.). In such highland regions as Jotunheim and Hardanger 
Vidda habitations are hardly less scanty than in the N. About 
two-thirds of the population, then, dwell by the coast and 
fjords, and about one-quarter in the inland lowlands, leaving 
a very small upland population. The rural and urban populations 
form respectively about 76 and 24% of the whole. Of the 
chief towns of Norway, Christiania, the capital, had a population 
in 1000 of 229,101, Bergen of 72,179, Trondhjem of 38,156, 
Stavanger of 30,541, Drammen of 23,093. The towns with 
populations between 15,000 and ro,ooo are Christiansand, 
Frcdrikstad, Christiansund, Fredriksh&ld, Aalesund, Skien, 
Arendal and Laurvik. All these are ports. 

The population of Norway in 1801 was returned as 883,038. 
A rapid increase obtained from 181 5 to 1835, a lesser increase 
thereafter till 1865, and a very slight increase till 1890. The 
second half of the 19th century, down to 1890, was the period 
of heaviest emigration from Norway. The vast majority of 
Norwegian emigrants go to the United States of America. But 
emigration slackened in the last decade of the 19th century, 
during which period the movement from rural districts to towns, 
which had decreased from about the middle of the- century, 
revived. The number of Norwegians abroad may be taken at 
350,000. The Lapps, commonly called Finns by the Norwegians, 
and confined especially to Finmarken (which is named from 
them), are estimated at 1% of the population. There are 
also a few Finns (about half the number of Lapps), whom the 
Norwegians call Kvcener, a name of early origin. The excess 
of births over deaths, about as 1-4 to 1, is much above the 
European average; the death-rate is also unusually low. The 
number of marriages is rather low, and the average age of 
marriage is high. The percentage of illegitimacy has shown 
some increase, but is not so high as in Sweden or Denmark. 
The percentage of longevity is high. The preponderance of 
females over males (about 1073 to 1000) is partly accounted 
for by the number of males who emigrate. The higher mortality 
of males is traced in part to the dangers of a seafaring life. 

Down to the middle of the 19th century drunkenness was a 
strongly-marked characteristic of Norwegians. A strict licensing 
system was then introduced with success. Local boards wer<5 
given a wide control over the issue of licences, and in 1871 
companies (satnlag) were introduced to monopolize and control 
the retail trade in spirits. Their profits do not, as in the Gothen- 
burg system, go to the municipal funds, but are applied directly 
to objects of public utility. In 1894 a general referendum 
resulted in the entire prohibition of the sale of spirits in some 
towns for five years. The control of retail trade in beer and 
wine by the samlag has been introduced to some extent. 

In Norway a strongly individual national character is to be 
expected, combined with conservatism of ancient customs 
and practices. The one finds no better illustration than the 
individuality of modern Norwegian music and painting. The 
other is still strong. Such customs as the lighting of the mid- 
summer fires and the attendant celebrations still survive. 
Peculiar local costumes are still met with, such as those associated 
with weddings. In the coastwise shipping trade and the fisheries 
of the north, high-prowed square-sailed boats are frequently 
employed which are the direct descendants of the vessels of 
the early vikings. Some examples of the ancient farmstead, 
composed of a group of wooden buildings each of a single 
chamber, are preserved, and medieval ornamental woodwork 
is met with. Wood is the principal building material except in 
some larger towns where brick and stone have superseded it. 
Where this is not the case, fires have left few, if any, ancient 
domestic buildings, but the preservation of ancient models in 
wooden houses makes Norwegian towns peculiarly picturesque. 
Norway retains a few highly interesting examples of ecclesiastical 
architecture. There are the peculiar small wooden churches 
(stavekirke) dating from the nth to the 14th century, with 
high-pitched roofs rising in tiers so as to give the building some- 
thing of the form of a pyramid. The roofs are beautifully shingled 
in wood. The wall timbers are vertical. To protect them from 
the weather, the roofs overhang deeply, and the lowest sometimes 
covers a species of external colonnade. The carving is often 
very rich. The most famous of these churches is that of Borgund 
near Laerdalsoren; another fine example is at Hitterdal on 
the Kongsberg-Telemark road. On the other hand there are a 
few Romanesque and Gothic stone churches. In some of these 
the influence of English architecture is clear, as in the metropolitan 
cathedral of Trondhjem and the nave of Stavanger cathedral. 
St Mary's Church at Bergen, however, tends towards the French 
models. A good example of the smaller stone church is at 
Vossevangen, and there are several of Late Romanesque character 
in the Trondhjem district. There are ruins of a cathedral at 
Hamar, and a few monastic remains, as at Utstein, north of 
Stavanger, and on the island of Selje off Statland. Remains 
of pure Early English work are occasionally found, as at Ogne 
in Jaederen, but the later Gothic styles were not developed 
in Norway. 

Tourist Traffic and Communications. — During the later decades of 
the 19th century Norway was rapidly opened upto British, American 
and German visitors. Passenger communications from -. 
Great Britain are maintained chiefly between Hull and *** 

Stavanger, Bergen, Aalesund, Christiansund and Trondhjem; Hull, 
Christiansand and Christiania; Newcastle and Stavanger, Bergen 
and the North; London and Christiania, &c, and there are also 
passenger services from Grimsby, Grangemouth and other ports. 
Yachting cruises to the great fjords and the North Cape are also 
provided. A daily service of mail steamers works between Chris- 
tiania and all ports to Bergen ; thence the summer service is hardly 
less frequent to Trondhjem. From each large port small steamers 
serve the fjords and inner waters in the vicinity, and there are also 
steamers on several of the larger lakes. The season lasts from June 
to the middle of September. The voyage to the North Cape is taken 
by many in order to see the midnight sun " in June and 
Roads. j u iy. Among the land-routes connecting the great fjords 
of the west the following may be mentioned, (i) The road from Sand 
on Sandsfjord (a branch of Bukken Fjord), which follows the Sand 
river up to the foot of Lake Suldal, near the head of which is Naes. 
From here a finely engineered road runs up the Bratlandsdal, crosses 
the Horrebraekke and descends past Seljestad to Odde at the head 
of a branch of Hardanger Fjord. (2) From Eide on another branch 
of the same fjord a road runs to Vossevangen (which is connected by 
rail with Bergen) and continues N. to Stalheim, where it descends 
through the Naerodal to Gudvangen on a branch of Sogne Fjord. 
(3) From Vadheim on this fjord a road runs N. to Sandene and 
Utvik on Nordfjord. Routes N. from this fjord are (4) that from 
Faleide by Grodaas on Lake Hornindal to Hellesylt on Sunelv Fjord 
and Oje on Norangs Fjord, and (5) that from the same station or 
from Visnaes, by way of Lake Stryn, to Grotlid, and Merok on 
Geiranger Fjord. All these routes pass through magnificent scenery. 
For the same reason there should also be mentioned (6) the road 
through the Telemark, which branches from the Bratlandsdal road 
at Breifond, mounts the Haukelidsaeter and descends to Dalen, from 
which the Bandaks canal route gives access to Skien on the S.E. 
coast, the road continuing from Dalen E. to Kongsberg; also those 
running E. from the great fjords — from Laerdalsoren on Sogne Fjord, 
branching (7) through Hallingdal, and (8) through Valdres; (9) the 
road from Grotlid to Otta in Gudbrandsdal, running N. of the 
Jotunheim; (10) the road from Veblungsnaes on a branch of Molde 
Fjord, running through the Romsdal and over to Domaas; (11) the 
N. road across Dovre Fjeld from Domaas to Storen on the railway to 
Trondhjem. Beyond the districts thus indicated, the Saetersdal, a 
southern valley, is visited by many, and in the far N. the Lofoten 
Islands and some of the fjords, as Lyngen and Alt en, are very fine. 
The mountains of Jotunheim have attracted several well-known 
mountaineers. 

The main roads of Norway, the construction of which has de- 
manded the highest engineering skill, were not brought into existence 
until the last half of the 19th century. A Highways Act of 1851 
placed the roads under the immediate control of local authorities, 
ut government grants are made for the construction not only of 
main roads, but in many cases of cross-roads also. In a country 
where railways are few, posting is of prime importance, and in 
Norway the system is well developed and regulated. Along all main 
roads there are posting stations (skydsstationer, pronounced shuss- 
stashoner), hotels, inns or farms, whose owners are bound to have 
horses always in readiness; at some stations on less frequented 
roads time is allowed for them to be procured. Posting stations are 
under strict control and the tariff is fixed. The vehicles are the 
stolkjcerre (pronounced approximately stolcharer) for two passengers, 
and the kariol or carriole for one. A similar posting system obtains 
by rowing-boats on lakes and fjords. 

The first railway, that between Christiania and Eidsvold, was 
constructed by agreement between British capitalists and the 
Norwegian government, and opened in 1854. The total 
Kauways. \ ett gth f railways is only about 1600 m., Norway having 
the lowest railway mileage in proportion to area of any European 
state, though in proportion to population the length of lines is com- 
paratively great. Almost the whole are svate lines. Railways are 
most fully developed in the S.E., both N. and S. of Christiania. 
The principal trunk line connects Christiania with Trondhjem by 
way of Hamar and the Osterdal, Roros and Stflren. Four lines cross 
the frontier into Sweden — from Christiania by Kongsvinger (Kongs- 
vinger railway) and by Fredrikshald (Smaalenenes railway), from 
Trondhjem by Storlien (Meraker railway), and from Narvik on 
Ofoten Fjord, the most northerly line in the world. Among other 
important lines may be mentioned that serving Lillehammer, Otta, 
&c, in Gudbrandsdal, that running S.W. from Christiania to Dram- 
men, Skien and Laurvik; the Saetersdal line N. from Christian- 
sand; the Jaederen line from Stavanger to Egersund and 
Flekkefjord; the Bergen- Vossevangen line; and the branch from 
Hell on the Meraker railway northward to Levanger. These local 
lines form links in important schemes for trunk lines. Norwegian 
railways are divided between the standard gauge and one of 3 ft. 
6 in.; on the N. line a change of gauge is made at Hamar. 

	Some of the large lakes form important channels for inland 
	- - navigation; the rivers, however, are not navigable for 
	s * any considerable distance. A canal from Fredrikshald 
	gives access N. to Skellerud, and the Bandaks canal connects Dalen 
	in the Telemark with Skien. 

The post-office is well administered, and both telegraph and 
telephone systems are exceptionally extensive. 

1 ndustries. Agriculture. — About 70 % of the total area of Norway 
is barren, and about 21 % is forest land, but the small agricultural 
area employs, directly or indirectly, about 40 % of the population. 
The great majority of the peasantry are freeholders. Legislation has 
provided for the retention of landed property by families to which 
it has belonged for any considerable period — thus, under certain 
conditions, a family which has parted with land can reacquire it at an 
appraisement— or land alienated by its owner may on his death be 
acquired by his next of kin. The chief crops are oats barley, potatoes, 
mangcorn (a mixed crop of oats and barley), rye and wheat, the last 
being little cultivated. Cattle and sheep are kept in large numbers. 
Farmers commonly hold upland summer pastures together with 
their lowland farms, and in the open season frequently occupy a 
setter (upland farmstead) and devote themselves to dairy work. 
Norwegian horses are small and thick-set, and remarkably sure- 
footed. t In the north large herds of reindeer are kept by Lapps. 
There is an agricultural college and model farm at Aas near 
Christiania. 

Forestry. — Forest industries are confined chiefly to the S.E. and 
to the Trondhjem-Namsen district. Lumbering is an important 
industry. Forestry is controlled by the Department of Agriculture, 
and its higher branches are taught at the Aas college. 

Fisheries. — The sea fisheries are of high economic importance. 
The principal are the cod fisheries. In March and April the cod 
shoal on the coastal banks for the purpose of spawning, and this gives 
rise to the well-known fishery for which the Lofoten Islands are the 

Principal base. In April and May shoals of capelan appear off 
inmarken, followed by cod and other fish, small whales, &c, which 
prey upon them ; this affords a second fishery. For herring there is 
a spring fishery off Stavanger and Haugesund, and one in November 
and December off Nordland. Mackerel fisheries are important 
from Trondhjem Fjord S. to the Skagerrack. Salmon and sea-trout 
fisheries are important in the rivers and still more off the coast. 
Fishermen from Tonsberg, Tromso, Hammerfest, Vardo, Vadso, 
&c, work with the arctic fisheries, sealing, whaling, &c, from Green- 
land to Spitsbergen and Novaya Zemlya. A fishery board at Bergen 
administers the Norwegian fisheries. The annual value of the coast 
fisheries ranges from £1,000,000 to £1,500,000. 

Mining. — Norway is not rich in minerals. Coal occurs only on 
And6, an island in Vesteraalen. Silver is mined at Kongsberg; 
copper at Roros, Sulitelma, and Aamdal in Telemarken; iron at 
Kfodeberg near Arendal and in the Dunderlandsdal (developed early 
in the 20th century). Granite is quarried near Fredrikstad, 
Fredrikshald and Sarpsborg, and exported as paving setts and kerb- 
stones, mostly to Great Britain and Germany. Good marble is 
found near Fredrikshald, and also in the Salten and Ranen districts. 

Manufacturing Industries. — The most important are works con- 
nected with the timber trade, foundries and engineering shops, 
spinning and weaving mills, brick and tile works, breweries, paper- 
mills, tobacco factories, flour-mills, glass works, and potteries, 
nail works, shipbuilding yards, rope works, factories for preserved 
food (especially fish), margarine, matches, fish guano, boots, and 
hosiery, distilleries and tanneries. The chief industrial centres are 
Christiania, Bergen, Fredrikstad and Sarpsborg, Dram men, Skien 
and Porsgrund, Trondhjem, Fredrikshald and Stavanger. Large 
water-power is available in many districts. A powerful impulse was 
given to industrial enterprise by the non-renewal of the customs 
treaty with Sweden in 1897, which established a protective system 
against that country. 

Shipping and Commerce. — The Norwegians, in proportion to their 
numbers, are the first nation in the world in the mercantile marine 
industry. Actually their mercantile marine is only exceeded by 
those of Great Britain, Germany and the United States. From 1850 
to 1880 the tonnage increased from 289,000 to more than 1,500,000. 
The tonnage now exceeds the latter figure, but steam has greatly 
increased the carrying power. In 1880 Norwegian steam vessels had 
a tonnage of about 52,000; they now exceed 640,000 tons. The 
annual value of imports is about £16,500,000, and of exports about 
£10,000,000. The growth of both may be judged from periodic 
averages — 

	1851-1855. 
	1 866-1 870. 
	1 886-1 890. 
	Imports 
	Exports 
	£2,800,000 
	2,400,000 
	£5,600,000 
	3,000,000 
	£9,200,000 
	6,600,000 

Great Britain and Germany are the countries principally trading with 
Norway. Great Britain takes about 40 % (by value) of Norwegian 
exports, and sends about 26% of the total imports into Norway; 
Germany takes 14% of the exports, and sends 28% of the imports. 
The chief articles of export are timber, wooden wares and wood pulp, 
principally to Great Britain, and fish products, principally to 
Germany, Sweden and Spain. These make 65% of the exports — 
others of importance are paper, ships, ice, stone and nails. Of the 
imports about 58% by value are for consumption, 42% material 
for production. Among the first are cereals (principally from 
Russia), groceries (from Germany), and clothing (from Germany and 
Great Britain). Among the second are coal (chiefly from Great 
Britain), hides and skins, cotton and wool, oil and machinery, 
steamships, and metal goods (from Great Britain, Germany and 
Sweden). 

Government. — Norway is an independent, constitutional and 
hereditary monarchy, the union with Sweden having been dis- 
solved on the 7th of June 1905, after lasting 91 years. The 
constitution rests on the fundamental law (grundlov) promul- 
gated at Eidsvold on the 17th of May 1814, and altered in detail 
at various times. The executive is vested in the king, who 

	B 
	3 
	SOUTHERN NORWAY 
	Scale, 1:2,750,000 
	English Miles 
	o t to jo 30 40 50 60 
	• FroQff' 
	' County (Amt) boundaries • ** 
	Capitals of Counties - « 
	Railways ■ »««-m Canals „******-. 
	Glaciers and Snowfields^ „ *§g0> ~\ 
	Fortifications..- „ * <£, ^ 
	„<^ 
	tare**** 
	Freien ^% 
	K*IIcv*jgT^ 
	Hotter. A 
	Stounats. 
	Butfjord- ^,Sk**rV. 
	S'rrir e >5ftU 
	sail 
	JIM 
	WWmnk 
	wax 
	Ytre-SulenS. 
	Karmoy 
	Si a van' 
	:sv«»tfk«*l u/V/ >%A»ki.t. iaVy \ ti ° 
	ktwd 
	CO 
	< -^5 a 48rH^ r~ 
	B Loftgfitude Kast 8° of Crcenwich 
	rmeryW*lk<* k. 

comes of age at eighteen. His authority is exercised through, 
and responsibility for his official acts rests with, a council of 
state consisting of a minister and councillors, who are the heads 
of finance, public accounts, church and education, defence, 
public works, agriculture, commerce, navigation and industry 
and foreign affairs. The king appoints these councillors and high 
officials generally in the state, church, army, navy, &c. He can 
issue provisional ordinances pending a meeting of parliament, 
can declare war (if a war of offence, only with the consent of 
parliament) and conclude peace, and has supreme command of 
the army and navy. The legislative body is the parliament 
(storthing), the members of which are elected directly by the 
people divided into electoral divisions, each returning one member. 
Until the election of 1906 the members were chosen by electors 
nominated by the voters. Elections take place every three 
years. The franchise is extended to every Norwegian male who 
has passed his twenty-fifth year, has resided five years in the 
country, and fulfils the legal conditions of citizenship. Under 
the same conditions, and if they or their husbands have paid 
taxes for the past year, the franchise is extended to women 
under a measure adopted by the Storthing in June 1907. 
Members of parliament must possess the franchise- in their con- 
stituency, and must have resided ten years in the country; 
their age must not be less than thirty. The Storthing meets at 
Christiania, normally for two months in each year; it must 
receive royal assent to the prolongation of a session. After the 
opening of parliament the assembly divides itself into two sections, 
the upper (lagthing) consisting of one-quarter of the total number 
of members, and the lower (odelsthing) of the remainder. Every 
bill must be introduced in the Odelsthing; if passed there it is 
sent to the Lagthing, and if carried there also the royal assent 
gives it the force of law. If a measure is twice passed by the 
Odelsthing and rejected by the Lagthing, it is decided by a 
majority of two-thirds of the combined sections. The king has a 
veto, but if a measure once or twice vetoed is passed by three 
successive parliaments it becomes law ipso facto. This occurred 
when in 1899 the Norwegians insisted on removing the sign of 
union with Sweden from the flag of the mercantile marine. 
Members of parliament are paid 13s. 4d. a day during 
session and their travelling expenses. Parliament fixes taxa- 
tion, and has control of the members of the council of state, 
who are not allowed to vote in either house, though they may 
speak. 

Finance, &c. — The annual revenue and expenditure are each about 
5I millions sterling. Considerable sums, however, have been raised 
by loans, principally for railways. These amounted, between 1900 
and 1906 (the financial year ending the 31st of March) to nearly 
£4,500,000. The principal sources of revenue are customs, railways, 
post office and telegraphs, the income tax (which is graduated and 
not levied on incomes below 1000 kroner or £55, 6s. 8d.), and excise. 
The principal items of expenditure are railways, defence (principally 
the army), thepost office, interest on debt, the church and education, 
and justice. The Bank of Norway is a private joint-stock corpora- 
tion, in which the state has large interests. It is governed by special 
acts of parliament, and its chief officials are publicly appointed. It 
alone has the right to issue notes, which are in wide circulation. 
The Mortgage Bank (Norges Hypotkekbank) was established by the 
state to grant loans on real estate. The currency of Norway is based 
on a gold standard; but the monetary unit is the krone (crown), 
of is. 1 Jd. value, divided into 100 dre. The metric system is in use. 

Army and Navy, — The army consists of the line, the militia or 
reserve (landvosrn), and the second reserve (landstorm). All capable 
men of twenty-two years of age and upwards are liable for. con- 
scription (except the clergy and pilots), and when called they serve 
6 years in the line, 6 years with the reserve and 4 years with the 
second reserve. In war, men are liable to service from the 18th to the 
50th year of age. Only the line can be sent out of the country. The 
men only meet for military training from 18 to 102 days in eachyear. 
The peace establishment of the line is 12,000 men, with 750 officers ; 
its war footing 26,000, or more, but may not exceed I 8,000 without 
the authority of parliament. Of enlisted troops there are only 
fortress garrisons, and the Christiania garrison of Norwegian Guards. 
The principal fortresses are Oscarsborg on Christiania Fjord, Agdenes 
(Trondhjem Fjord), Bergen, Tonsberg and Christiansand. A number 
of Norwegian forts along the S. Swedish frontier were dismantled 
under the convention with Sweden of 1905, when a neutral zone was 
established on either side of the frontier southward from 61 ° N. • The 
navy consists of about 1 200 officers and men on permanent service; 
but all seafaring men between twenty-two and thirty-eight are liable 
for maritime conscription, and are put through some preliminary 
training. The war vessels include four battleships of 3500 to aooo 
tons each, and about 16 other vessels, besides a torpedo flotilla — 
intended for coast defence only. The chief naval station is at Karl- 
johansvaern (Horten). 

Justice.— Civil cases are usually brought first before a commission 
of mediation (Jorligelseskommisston), from which an appeal lies to 
the local inferior courts, which are also tribunals of first instance, 
and are worked by judges on circuit and assessors. There are 
three superior courts of appeal (overretter), at Christiania, Bergen 
and Trondhjem, and one supreme court (hoiestcrct). Criminal cases 
are tried either in jury courts (lagmandsret) or courts of assize 
(meddomsret)i The first is for more serious offences; the second deals 
with minor offences and is a court of first instance. Military crimes 
are dealt with by a military judicial organization. Finally there is 
a high court of impeachment (rigsret) t before which members of 
parliament, the government, &c, are tried for misdemeanours com- 
mitted in their public capacity. 

Local Government, — The country is divided into twenty counties 
(amter) (see population), the cities of Christiania and Bergen being 
included in these. Other towns are formed into communes, governed 
by representatives, from whom a council (formcend) is elected by 
themselves. Rural communes (herreder) are similarly administered, 
and their chairmen form a county council (amtsthing) for each county. 
At the head is the amtmand, the county governor. The electoral 
franchise for local council election is for men the same as the parlia- 
mentary franchise, and, like it, is extended in a limited degree to 
women. 

Religion and Education, — The state religion, to which the king 
must conform, is Evangelical Lutheran. Only about 2-4% of the 
population are dissenters. All Christian sects except Jesuits are 
tolerated. The king nominates the clergy of the established church. 
Norway is divided into six bishoprics (stifter), Christiania, Hamar, 
Christiansand, Bergen, Trondhjem, Tromso ; and these into deaneries 
(provstier), with subdivisions into clerical districts (prcestegjeld), 
parishes and sub-parishes. The clergy take a leading part in primary 
education, which, in spite of the difficulties arising in a sparsely 
populated country, reaches a high standard. Education is com- 
pulsory, the school-going age being from 61 to 14 years in towns and 
7 to 14 years in the country. About 94% of the children of school- 
going age attend the primary schools, which are administered by 
school boards in the municipalities and the counties. Teachers must 
belong to theestablished church. ^ Their training colleges include 
one free public college in each diocese. The municipalities and 
counties bear the post of primary education with a state grant. 
There are continuation schools, evening schools, &c, and for secondary 
education, communal middle schools, and state gymnasier. There is 
a state-aided university at Christiania. 

Authorities. — See Norway (official publication for the Paris 
Exhibition) (Eng. trans., Christiania, 1900, dealing with the land and 
its inhabitants in every aspect, and giving Norwegian bibliographies 
for each subject); A. N. Kia?r and others, Norges Land og Folk 
(Christiania, 1884 seq.); N. Rolfsen, Norge i det Nittende Aar- 
hundrede (Christiania, 1900 seq.); Y. Nielsen, Reisehaandbog over 
Norge (10th ed., Christiania, 1903); various guidebooks in English; 
P. B. duChaillu, The Land of the Midnight Sun (London, i88i);and 
The Land of the Long Night (London, 1900) ; C. F. Keary, Norway 
and the Norwegians (London, 1892); A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, In the 
Northman's Land (London, 1896); I. Bradshaw, Norway, its Fjords, 
Fields and Fosses (London, 1896); A. Chapman, Wild Norway 
(London, 1897); E. B. Kennedy, Thirty Seasons in Scandinavia 
(London, 1903) ; E. C. Oppenheim, New Climbs in Norway (London, 
1898); W. C. Slingsby, Norway, The Northern Playground (on 
mountaineering) (Edinburgh, 1904); H. H. Reusch, Det Nordlige 
Norges Geologx (Christiania, 1892); T. Kjerulf, Udsigt over det 
sydlige Norges geologi (Christiania, 1879; a German translation 
was published at Bonn, 1880); W. C. Brogger, Die Silurischen 
Etagen 2 und 3 (Christiania, 1882) ; see also a series of memoirs on 
the eruptive rocks^ of the Christiania region in Videnskabsselskabets 
Skrifter (Christiania) ; A. E. Tornebohm, Grunddragen af det centrala 
Skandinaviensbergbyggnad, KongL Svenska Vetensk, Akad, Handl, 
vol. xxvii. No. 5(1896); Jahrbuch des Norwegischen Meteorologischen 
Instituts (Christiania); H. Mohn, " Klima Tabeller for Norge," in 
Videnskabsselsk. Skrifter (1895 seq.); M. N. and A. Blytt, Norges 
Flora (Christiania, 1 861-1877); C. Hartman, Handbok % Scandina- 
viens Flora (Stockholm, 1879); J. M. Norman, Norges Arkliskc Flora 
(Christiania, 1894 seq.); Statistisk Aarbog for Kongeriget Norge 
(Christiania, annual) ; H. L. Bnekstad, Constitution of the Kingdom 
of Norway (London, 1905) ; F. Nansen, Norway and the Union with 
Sweden, and Supplementary Chapter, separate (London, 1905). 
On the licensing system in Norway — Foreign Office Report, Misc. 
series, 279 (London, 1893); Board of Trade Rep, on Production and 
Consumption of Alcoholic Liquors (London, 1899); H. E. Berner, 
" Braendevinsbolagene i Norge," in Nordisk Tidskrift (1891). 

<O.J.R.H.) 

History. 
Early History. — Archaeological and geological researches have 
revealed a fishing and hunting population in Norway, possibly 
as far back as c. 6000 B.C. Until lately this aboriginal people, 
which was certainly non-Aryan, was held to be Lappish, but 
recent investigations seem to show that the Lapps only entered 
Norway about a.d. 000-1000, and that the original population 
was probably of Finnish race, though only distantly allied to the 
Ugro-Finns now inhabiting Finland. To them belong perhaps 
certain non-Aryan names for natural features of the country, 
such as Toten, Vefsen, Bukn. 

The time of the immigration of a Teutonic element is far from 
certain. It did not extend N. beyond the Trondhjem district 
until about the beginning of our era, but there can be 
Teutonic little doubt that the immigrants' advance was ex- 
ttoa.***' tremely slow, and it is suggested, on the evidence of 
archaeology, that the Teutonic element entered S. 
Norway towards the end of the (Scandinavian) later Stone age, 
c. 1700 B.C. (see "Scandinavian Civilization). But what- 
ever were the stages of the process, the language of the older race 
was superseded by Teutonic, and those aborigines who were not 
incorporated (probably most often as slaves) were driven into 
the mountains or the islands that fringe the coast. In the high- 
lands the " Finns " maintained some independence down to 
historical times. The old English poem Beowulf mentions a 
" Finnaland " which should perhaps be located in S. Norway 
in about the 6th century, and later on the ancient laws of this 
region forbid the practice of visiting the " Finns " to obtain 
knowledge of the future. But only in Finmark, which even in 
the 13th century stretched far into Sweden and included the 
Norwegian district of Tromso, could the earlier inhabitants live 
their old life, and here they finally fell into the utmost want and 
misery. Their existence is mentioned as a thing of the past by 
a North Trondhjem writer in 1689. 

The new Teutonic element of population seems to have 
flowed into Norway from two centres; one western, probably 
from Jutland, the other eastern, from the W. coast of Sweden. 
The western stream covered Agder, Rogaland and Hordaland (the 
modern districts of Christiansand and Sondre Bergenhus), and 
finally extended N. as far as Sondmore, while the eastern stream 
flowed across Romerike and Hadeland through the Dales to the 
Trondhjem district, where it divided, one stream flowing down 
the W. coast till it met the western settlements, another pene- 
trating N. into Haalogaland (which included the modern Nord- 
land as well as Helgeland), and a third E. into the N. Swedish 
districts of Jamtland and Helsingland. The bodies of immigrants 
were no doubt more or less independent, and each was probably 
under a king. It is probable that the Horder, who gave their 
name to Hordaland and Hardanger, were a branch of the Harudes 
whom Ptolemy in the 2nd century mentions as living in Jutland, 
where their name remains in the present Hardesyssel. The 
Ryger, who gave their name to Rogaland, and the modern 
Ryfylke, are probably akin to the Rugii, an E. Germanic tribe 
at one time settled in N.E. Pomerania, where we have a remi- 
niscence of their name in Riigenwalde. The first mention of 
any tribe settled in Norway is by Ptolemy, who speaks of the 
Chaidenoi or Heiner, inhabiting the W. of his island Scandia. 
The system of settlement in Norway appears to have been 
different from that adopted by the same race in other lands. 
In Denmark, for instance, a group of as many as twenty settlers 
held land more or less in common, but this system, which 
demanded that a considerable extent of land should be readily 
accessible, was not feasible in the greater part of Norway, and 
except in one or two flatter districts each farm was owned, or at 
least worked, by a single family. 

When history first sheds a faint light over Norway we find each 
small district or " fylke " (Old Norse fylkir, from folk, army) 
Baf . settled under its own king, and about twenty-nine 
kingship. fy^ er m tn e country. At times a king would win an 
overlordship over the neighbouring tribes, but the 
character of the country hindered permanent assimilation. 
The king always possessed a hird, or company of warriors 
sworn to his service, and indeed royal birth and the possession of 
such a hird, and not land or subjects, were the essential attributes 
of a king. There was no law of primogeniture, and on the death 
of a king some of his heirs would take their share of the patri- 
mony in valuables, gather a hird, and spend their lives in warlike 
expeditions (see Vikings), while one would settle down and 
become king of the fylke. There are indications that these 
conditions were fostered by a matriarchal system, and that it 
would often occur that a wandering king would marry the 
daughter of a fylkes-king and become his heir. Probably the 
king's power was only absolute over his own hird. He was 
certainly commander-in-chief and perhaps chief priest of the 
fylke, but the administrative power was chiefly in the hands of 
the herser and possibly of an earl. The position of earls is vague, 
but it is noticeable that both those of whom we hear in Harald 
Haarfager's time take the opposite side to their king. The 
herser (Old Norse her sir) 7 of whom there were several in each 
fylke, united high birth with wealth and political power, and with 
the holder, the class of privileged hereditary landowners from 
which they sprang, formed an aristocracy of which there seems 
little trace in the other Scandinavian countries at this period. 
Its rise in Norway is perhaps due to the fact that the nature of 
the country, as well as the individualistic system of settlement, 
left more scope for inequalities of wealth than in Denmark or 
Sweden. Once a family had become wealthy enough to fit out 
Viking ships, it must have added wealth to wealth, besides 
enormously raising its prestige. The lands of almost all the 
most powerful families were on islands, whence it was easy to 
set forth on roving expeditions. The family property of the 
earls of Lade, for instance, whose representative in the latter 
half of the 9th century was the most powerful man of the district, 
was on the island of Naero. These islands had been the refuge 
of the aborigines, and it is possible that, as A. Hansen has 
suggested, the rise of the aristocracy depends here, as elsewhere, 
on a subject population. Among the proper names of thralls 
in a poem in the Elder Edda are several which can only be 
explained on the hypothesis that they are Finnish, e.g. Klums, 
Lasmer, Drumba. Harald Haarfager's decree concerning " those 
who clear forests and burn salt, fishermen and hunters " pro- 
bably refers to the Finns as a class apart. There can be no 
doubt that, in Haalogaland for instance, the aristocracy gained 
its wealth not only from the tribute extorted from the Finns in 
Finmark, but also from slave labour. 

The eight Trondhjem fylker had a common Thing or assembly 
very early, but these districts were remote, while the wealthy 
western districts were too much cut of! from each other to unite 
effectively, though here also a common Thing was early estab- 
lished. The first successful attempt at unification originated 
round Vestfold, the modern Jarlsberg and Laurvik Amt on the 
Christiania fjord. Here also there was a certain degree of union 
very early, and it is possible that national feeling was fostered 
by proximity to the Danish and Swedish kingdoms. The 
district was thickly populated, and a centre of commerce. 
Tradition made the royal family a branch of the great Yngling 
dynasty of Upsala, which claimed descent from the god Frey. 
Through several generations this family had extended its 
kingdom by marriage, conquest and inheritance, and by the end 
of the reign of Halfdan the Black, it included the greater part 
of Hamar and Oslo Stift, and the fylke of Sogn, the district round 
the modern Sognefjord. 

Half dan's son, Harald Haarfager, having no brothers, suc- 
ceeded to the whole kingdom, and was further fortunate in that 
an uncle helped him to maintain his rights. By 
866 his power was so well established in S. Norway j^r^ 
that he contemplated the conquest of the whole land. fr £tr 
The chief obstacle appears to have been the resistance, 
not only of the petty kings, but also of the aristocratic families, 
who dreaded the power of a monarchy established by force, and 
consequently supported the vaguer authority of their own 
kinglets. There can be no doubt that Harald introduced a 
feudal view of obligations towards the king, and landowning 
families, who had regarded their odel } or inherited property, as 
absolutely their own, resented being forced to pay dues on it. 
In each district Harald offered the herser the opportunity of 
becoming his vassals, answerable to him for the government of 
the district. The increased dues and the grants of land made by 
Harald rendered the position of one of his earls more lucrative 
than that of king under the older system; and it shows to what 
a paramount position the old aristocracy must have attained, 
that numbers of the herser and holder could not reconcile them- 
selves to the limitation of their independence, but quitted the 
lands which were their real title to influence, rather than submit 
to the new order. But the little kingdoms only made futile 
attempts at combination, except in the western districts of Agde 
(comprising the modern Lister and Mandal and Nedenaes), 
Rogaland and Hordaland. Here was the home of the " western 
Vikings " who for nearly a century had owed wealth and fame 
to their raids on the British Isles. Attack by land was impossible, 
and Harald had to gather men and ships for three years before he 
could meet the fleet of the allied kings at Hafsfjord. The 
battle (872) resulted in a victory to him, and with it all opposition 
in Norway was at an end. An expedition to Scotland and the 
Scottish isles (c. 891) dispersed enemies who could harry the 
Norwegian coast, many of them taking refuge in Iceland; and 
the earldom of the Orkneys and Shetlands became an appanage 
of the Norwegian Crown. For the moment the whole country 
was under a single king, but Harald himself destroyed his work, 
in accordance with old custom, by giving about twenty of his 
sons the title of king, and dividing the country among them, only 
qualifying this retrograde step by installing his favourite son 
Erik Blodoxe as over-king (930). Moreover, Harald had estab- 
lished no common Thing for the whole of his kingdom. Norway is 
naturally divided into three parts, and each of these remained 
more or less separate for centuries, even having separate laws 
until the second half of the 13th century. The Frostathing 
district (so called from Frosta near Trondhjem) included the 
eight Trondhjem fylker, and also Naumdal, Nordmore and 
Raumsdal. The Gulathing district consisted of Sondmore, 
Firdafylke, Sogn, Valdres, Hallingdal, Hordaland and Agde, 
and met at Gula in Hordaland. The third, the Eidsivathing, met 
on the shores of Lake Mjosen, and included the Uplands and also 
the " Vik," i.e. all the districts round Christiania fjord, until St 
Olaf established the Borgarthing at Sarpsborg as a centre for 
these latter. The king's council was composed of the local 
lenderm<znd, and thus varied with the district he happened 
to be visiting, an arrangement that had its advantages, since 
the local chiefs were acquainted with the laws of their dis- 
trict, though it was another hindrance to unification. It was 
only in 13 19 that a permanent council was formed, the Rigets 
Raad. 

Harald died in 933. Erik Blodoxe (Bloody-axe) only managed 
to rid himself of two rival over-kings, Olaf and Sigfred, his 
half-hrothers, for on hearing of his father's death, 
tbeQood. another son, Haakon (f.v.), called the Good, who had 
been brought up at iEthelstan's court, came to Norway 
with a small force and succeeded in ejecting Erik (934). 
After Haakon's death in 961 at the battle of Fitje, where his 
long struggle against Erik's sons and their Danish allies ter- 
minated, these brothers, headed by Harald Graafeld (grey-cloak) 
became masters of the W. districts, though the ruling spirit 
appears to have been their mother Gunhild. Earl Sigurd of 
Lade ruled the N., and the S. was held by vassal kings whom 
Haakon had left undisturbed. By 969 the brothers had succeeded 
in ridding themselves of Sigurd and two other rivals, but the 
following year Harald Graafeld was lured to Denmark and 
treacherously killed at the instigation of Earl Haakon, son of 
Sigurd, who had allied himself with the Danish king Harald 
GormssSn. With the latter's support Earl Haakon won Norway, 
but threw off his yoke on defeating Ragnfred Eriksson at 
Tingenes in 972. The S.E. districts were, however, still held by 
Harald Grenske, whose father had been slain by the sons of 
Erik. Haakon ruled ably though tyrannically, and his prestige 
was greatly increased by his victory over the Jomsvikings, a 
band of pirates inhabiting the island of Wollin at the mouth of the 
Oder, who had collected a large fleet to attack Norway. The 
date of their defeat at Hjorungavaag, now Lidvaag, is uncertain. 
But finally the earl's disregard of the feelings of the most power- 
ful " bonder," or landed proprietors, worked them up to 
revolt, and, in 995, there landed in Norway Olaf, great- 
grandson of Harald Haarfager and son of the king Tryggve 
of the Vik whom Gudrod Eriksson had slain, and whose father 
Olaf had been slain by Erik Blodoxe. 

The earl was treacherously killed by his thrall while in hiding, 
and Olaf entered unopposed upon his short and brilliant reign. 
His great work was the enforced conversion to Chris- j n trodue» 
tianity of Norway, Iceland and Greenland. In this aoa of 
undertaking both Olaf and his successor and namesake Christ?- 
looked for help to England, whence they obtained a SJ i jT* Jf 
bishop and priests; hence it comes that the organiza- 
tion of the early church in Norway resembles that of England. 
No more than England did Norway escape the struggle between 
Church and State, but the hierarchical party in Norway only rose 
to power after the establishment of an archiepiscopal see at 
Trondhjem in 11 52, after which the quarrel raged for over a 
century. Until the year 1100, when tithes were imposed, the 
priests depended for their livelihood on their dues, and Adam of 
Bremen informs us that this made them very avaricious. 

In the year 1000 Olaf fell at the battle of Svolder off Riigen, 
fighting against the combined Danish and Swedish fleets. The 
allies shared Norway between them, but the real 
power lay in the hands of Erik and Svein, sons of ^J oas 
Earl Haakon. In 1015, when Erik was absent in Denmark. 
England, another descendant of Harald Haarfager 
appeared, Olaf, the son of Harald Grenske, a great-grandson 
of Harald Haarfager (see Olaf II. Haraldsson). He defeated 
Svein at Nesje in 1016, which left him free to work towards a 
united and Christian Norway. For some years he was successful, 
but he strained the loyalty of his subjects too far, and on the 
appearance of Knut the Great in 1029 he fled to Russia. His 
death at the battle of Stiklestad on his return in 1030 was 
followed by a few years of Danish rule under Svein Knuts- 
son, which rendered Olaf's memory sweet by contrast, and 
soon the name of St Olaf came to stand for internal union and 
freedom from external oppression. In 1035 his young son 
Magnus, afterwards called the Good, was summoned from 
Russia, and was readily accepted as king. A treaty was made 
with Hardeknut which provided that whichever king survived 
should inherit the other's crown. Hardeknut died in 1042, 
and Magnus became king of Denmark, but a nephew of Knut 
the Great, Svein Estridsson, entered into league with Harald 
Haardraade (see Harald III.), the half-brother of St Olaf, 
who had just returned from the East. As soon, however, as 
overtures were made to him by Magnus, he forsook the cause 
of Svein, and in 1046 agreed to become joint king of Norway 
with Magnus. The difficulties arising out of this situation were 
solved by Magnus's death in 1047. 

Harald's attempts to win Denmark were vain, and in 1066 
he set about a yet more formidable task in attacking England, 
which ended with his death at Stamford Bridge in Bad Qf 
1066. His son Olaf Kyrre (the Quiet) shared the Harald 
kingdom with his brother Magnus until the latter's Haar- 
death in 1069, after which the country enjoyed a period jy^^* 
of peace. A feature of this reign is the increasing import- 
ance of the towns, including Bergen, which was founded by Olaf. 
In 1093 Olaf was succeeded by his turbulent son Magnus Barfod 
(barefoot) and by Haakon, son of Magnus the Good. The 
latter died in 1095. Besides engaging in an unsuccessful war 
against the Swedish king Inge, in which he was defeated at 
Foxerne in 1101, Magnus undertook three warlike expeditions 
to the Scottish isles. It was on the last of these expeditions, 
in 1 103, that he met his death. He was succeeded by his three 
sons, Eystein, Sigurd and Olaf. Olaf died young. Sigurd under- 
took a pilgrimage, from which he gained the name of Jorsalfar 
(traveller to Jerusalem). He won much booty from the Moors 
in Spain, from pirates in the Mediterranean, and finally at Sidon, 
which he and his ally Baldwin I. of Jerusalem took and sacked. 
Eystein died in 1122. Sigurd lived till 1130, but was subject 
to fits of insanity in his later years. He was the last undoubted 
representative of Harald Haarfager's race, for on his death 
his son Magnus was ousted t}y Harald Gille, or Gilchrist, who 
professed to be a natural son of Magnus Barfod. 
Harald Gille was slain in 1136 by another pretender, and 
anarchy ruled during the reign of his sons Eystein, Inge and 
Sigurd Mund. At last Inge's party attacked and 
suw!- d kil,ed first sfe 11 " 1 t 11 ^ and then Evstein ("57)« 
*tons' I n S e fell in a fight against Sigurd's son Haakon Herde- 
bred in 1161, but a powerful baron, Erling, succeeded 
in getting his son Magnus made king, on the plea that the boy's 
maternal grandfather was King Sigurd Jorsalfar. Descent 
through females was not valid in succession to the throne, and 
to render his son's position more secure, Erling obtained the 
support of the Church. In 1164 the archhishop of Trondhjem 
crowned Magnus, demanding that the crown should be held 
as a fief of the Norwegian Church. Owing to such concessions 
the Church was gaining a paramount position, when a new 
pretender appeared. Sverre (O.N. Sverrir) claimed to be the 
son of Sigurd Mund, and was adopted as leader by a party 
known as the Birkebeiner or Birchlegs. He possessed military 
genius of a rare order, and in spite of help from Denmark, the 
support of the Church and of the majority of barons, Magnus 
was defeated time after time, till he met his death at the battle 
of Nordnes in n 84. The aristocracy could offer little further 
opposition. In joining hands with the Church against Sverre, 
the local chiefs had got out of touch with the small landowners, 
with whose support Sverre was able to build up a powerful 
monarchy. Sverre's most dangerous opponent was the Church, 
which offered the most strenuous resistance to his efforts to 
cut down its prerogatives. The archbishop found support in 
Denmark, whence he laid his whole see under an interdict, but 
Sverre's counter-claim of his own divine right as king had much 
more influence in Norway. 

Sverre died in 1202, his last years harassed by the rise of 
the Baglers, or " crozier-men," with a new claimant at their 
Magnus. nea d. His son Haakon III. died two years later, 

perhaps of poison, but the Birkebeiner party in 1217 
succeeded in placing Haakon's son and namesake on the throne 
(see Haakon IV.). In 1240 the last of the rival claimants fell, 
and the country began to regain prosperity. The acquisition 
of Iceland was at length realized. Haakon's death occurred 
after the battle of Largs in the Orkneys in 1263. The war 
with Scotland was soon terminated by his son Magnus, who 
surrendered the Hebrides and the Isle of Man at the treaty of 
Perth in 1268. Magnus saw the worthlessness of a doubtful 
suzerainty over islands which had lost their value to Norway 
since the decay of Viking enterprise. He gained his title of Law- 
Mender from the revision of the laws, which had remained very 
much as* in heathen days, and which were still different for the 
four different districts. By 1 274 Magnus had secured the accept- 
ance of a revised compilation of the older law-books. The new 
code repealed all the old wergild laws, and provided that the 
major part of the fine for manslaughter should be paid to the 
victim's heir, the remainder to the king. Henceforward the 
council comes more and more to be composed of the king's 
court officials, instead of a gathering of the lendermcmd or 
barons of the district in which the king happened to be. During 
Magnus's reign we hear of a larger council, occasionally called 
palliment (parliament), which is summoned at the king's wish. 
The old landed aristocracy had lost its power so completely 
that even after Magnus's death in 1280 it was unable to reinstate 
itself during the minority of his son Erik. 

Erik was succeeded in 1299 by his brother Haakon V., who in 
1308 felt himself strong enough to abolish the dignity of the 
lender nuend. This paralysis of the aristocracy is 
o/Searfs- no doubt Partly to be ascribed to the civil wars, but 
tocr&cy. m P ar t also to the gradual impoverishment of the 
country, which told especially upon this class. Russia 
had long eclipsed Norway as the centre of the fur trade, and other 
industries must have suffered, not only from the civil wars, 
but also from the supremacy of the Hanseatic towns, which 
dominated the North, and could dictate their own terms. In 
earlier times the aristocratic families had owed their wealth 
to three main sources: commerce, Viking expeditions and 
slave labour. Trade had been a favourite means of enrich- 
ment among the aristocracy up to the middle of the 13th 
century, but now it was almost monopolized by Germans, and 
Viking enterprise was a thing of the past. The third source of 
wealth had also failed, for it is clear from the laws of Magnus 
that the class of thralls had practically disappeared. This 
must have greatly contributed to shatter the power of the class 
which had once been the chief factor in the government of 
Norway. 

Haakon's daughter Ingeborg had married Duke Erik of 
Sweden, and on Haakon's death in 13 19 their three-year-old 
son Magnus succeeded to the Norwegian and Swedish thrones, 
the two countries entering into a union which was not definitely 
broken till 1371. It was during this reign that Norway was 
ravaged by the Black Death. In 1343 Magnus handed over the 
greater part of Norway to his son Haakon VI., who married 
Margrete, daughter of King Valdemar III. of Denmark. Their 
young son Olaf V., already king of Denmark, succeeded to his 
father's throne on Haakon's death in 1380, but died in 1387, 
leaving the royal line extinct, and the nearest successor to the 
throne the hostile King Albrecht of Sweden, of the Mecklenburg 
family. The difficulty was met by filling the throne by election 
— an innovation in Norway, though it was the custom 
in Sweden and Denmark. The choice fell on King^p/ 1 
Haakon's widow Margrete, but a couple of years mgian, 
later, chiefly in order to gain German support in SwedIsh * 
a coming struggle with the Mecklenburgers, ^^trones!^ 
Norwegians elected as king the young Erik of 
Pomerania, great-nephew of the queen, who henceforth acted 
as regent. Erik had claims on the Swedish and Danish thrones, 
and in 1397, at Kalmar, he was solemnly crowned king over 
the three countries, which entered into a union " never to be 
dissolved." 

	Reigns of the Kings of Norway. 
	Harald (I.) Haarfager .... 972-930 (d. 933) 
	Erik Blodoxe 930-934 
	Haakon (I.) den Gode. . . . 935-961 
	Harald (II.) Graafeld .... 961-970 
	(Earl Haakon of Lade 970-995) 
	Olaf (1.^ Tiyggvesson . . * . . 995-1000 
	(Earls Erik and Haakon 1000-1016) 
	Saint Olaf (II.) 1016-1029(^1030) 
	Svein, son of Knut the Great . . 1030- 1035 
	Magnus (I.) den Gode . . . 1035-1047 
	Harald (III.) Haardraade . . . 1046-1066 
	Olaf (III.) Kyrre > . . . . 1066-1093 
	Magnus (II.) ' ) . . . . 1066-1069 
	Magnus (III.) Barfod . . . . 1093-1103 
	Eystein (I.) ] • ■ ■ ■ "03-1122 
	Sigurd (I.) Jorsalfar y. . . . 1103-1130 
	Olaf (IV.) J. . . . 1 103-1 116 
	Magnus (IV.) ) . . . 1130-1135 
	Harald Gille J . . . . 1 130-1136 
	Sigurd (II.) Mund 1. . . . 1136-1155 
	Eystein (II.) k 1136-1157 
	Inge J . . . 1136-1161 
	Haakon (II.) Herdebred . . . 1161-1162 
	Magnus (V.) 1162-1184 
	Sverre 1 184-1202 
	Haakon (III.) 1202-1204 
	Haakon (IV.) den gamle . . . 1217-1263 
	Magnus (VI.) 1263-1280 
	Erik 1 280-1 209 
	Haakon (V.) 1299-1319 
	Magnus (VII.) 1319-1343 
	Haakon (VI.) 1343-1380 
	Olaf (V.) 1381-1387 
	Margrete 1 387-1 389 
	Erik of Pomerania .... 1389- 

Authorities. — P. A. Munch, Del norske Folks Historic indtU 
1397 (1 852-1 863); J. E. Sars, Udsigt over den norske Historie, Deel 
i.-ii. (1873-1877); R. Keyser, Norges Stats- og RetsforfaVning (1867), 
and Den norske kirke under Katholicismen (1856); A. Taranger, Den 
Angelsaksiske kirkes Indflydelse paa den norske (1891); A. C. Bang, 
Stoat und Kirche in Norwegen bis zum Schlusse des ijten Jahrhunderts 
(Munich, 1875); A. M. Hansen, Landndm i Norge (1904); A. Bugge, 
Studier over de norske h y ers selvstyre og handel fdr Hanseaternes ttd 
(1899); F. Bruns, Die Lubecker Bergenfakrer und ihre Chronistik 
(Berlin, 1900) ; articles by G. Storm, Y. Nielsen, E. Hertzberg and 
others in the Historisk Tidskrift (Christiania) and other periodicals ; 
also the articles by K. v. Armira, O. Bremer, K. Kaalund and V. 
Gudmundsson in Pauls Grundriss der germanischen Philologic (vol. 
Hi., Strassburg, 1900). The above worlds are published in Christiania 
except where otherwise stated. In English, there is a history of 
Norway by H. H. Boyesen in the Story of the Nations scries (London, 
1900), and there are historical notes in G. Vigfusson and F. Y. 
Powell's Corpus poeticum Boreale (Oxford, 1883). The most im- 
portant original sources are: Snorre Sturlasson s Heimskringla, or 
Lives of the Kings of Norway (up to 1177), of which there is an 
English translation by W. Morris and E. Magnusson, with a valuable 
index volume compiled by the latter, in the Saga Library, vols, iii.- 
vi. (London, 1893-1905). The original Icelandic text is edited by 

F. J6nsson (Copenhagen, 1893-1901). For a critical investigation 
into the sources of Snorri and the contemporary historians, see G. 
Storm, Snorre Sturlasson 1 s Historieskrivning (Copenhagen, 1873, 
with map of ancient Norway), and F. J6nsson, Den oldnorske og 
oldislandske Litteraturs Historie (Bd. ii. Del. ii., Copenhagen, 1901). 
Of later sagas, Sverre's Saga (Fommanna Sogur f vol. viii., Copen- 
hagen) is translated by J. Sephton, Northern Library (vol. iv., 
London, 1899), and Haakon's Saga is given with a translation by 

G. W. Dasent in vols. ii. (text) and iv. (translation) of the Chronicles 
and Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland (London, 1894). Other 
important sources are: Diplomatarium Norvegicum, ed. C. Unger, 
Christiania, and Norges Gamle Love indtil 1397^ ed. R. Keyser and 
P. A. Munch (5 vols., Christiania, 1846-1895). (B. S. P.) 

1397-1814. — The history of Norway from 1397 down to the 
union with Sweden in 1814 falls naturally into four divisions. 
First, in 1450, the triple bond gave place to a union in 
which Norway became more firmly joined to Denmark. Next, 
in *536i ^ the result of the Reformation, Norway sank 
almost to the level of a province. After 1660 she gained 
something in status from the establishment of autocracy in 
Denmark, and at the close of the period she became a con- 
stitutional kingdom on a footing of approximate equality with 
Sweden. But for the convulsions to which some of these changes 
gave rise, Norway possesses during this period but little history 
of her own, and she sank from her former position as a con- 
siderable and independent nation. The kings dwelt outside her 
borders, her fleet and army decayed, and her language gradually 
gave place to Danish. Germans plundered her coasts 
ce t rv an( * monopolized her commerce, and after 1450 Danes 
began to appropriate the higher posts in her adminis- 
tration. When in 1448 Karl Knutsson was chosen king by the 
Swedes, and Christian of Oldenburg by the Danes, it was by 
force that Norway fell to the latter. On the 24th of November 
1449 the Norwegians protested against Christian's assumption 
of sovereignty over them, and against separation from the 
Swedes. Next year, however, the Swedes assented to the 
separation. Christian I. (1450-1481) gave estates and. offices 
in Norway] to his Danish subjects and raised money by pawning 
her ancient possessions, the Orkneys and Shetland islands, to 
the king of Scotland. His son Hans (14^-1513) purchased the 
obedience of the Norwegian nobles by concessions to their power. 
The imposing union continued in name, but the weakness of the 
nation and its government was strikingly illustrated when the 
Germans in Bergen besieged a monastery in which their enemy 
Olaf Nilsson, a high official, had taken refuge. 

After the downfall of Christian II. (1513-1524) the position of 
Norway in relation to Denmark was changed for the worse. 
She was ruled for a century and a quarter by Danish 
mb t officials; the churches and monasteries of Norway 
1 ury * were sacked by Danes, and Danes were installed as 
pastors under the Lutheran system, which the Norwegians were 
compelled to accept in 1539. Soon Norway was dragged by 
Denmark into the so-called Seven Years' War of the North 
(1563-70). However, the power of the Hanse League in Bergen 
was broken. The rule of the Oldenburg dynasty proved neglect- 
ful rather than tyrannical, and under it the mass of the peasants 
Was not flagrantly oppressed. Christian IV. (1588-1648), who 
founded Christiania, may almost be said to have discovered 
Norway anew. He reformed its government and strove to 
develop its resources, but his policy .involved Norway in the loss 
of the provinces of Jemtland and Herjedalen, which 
'century. were ceded t0 tne Swedes by the peace of Bromsebro 
(1645). The Danish war of revenge against Carl X. 
of Sweden resulted in further territorial loss by Norway. By the 
peace of koskilde (1658) she was compelled to renounce the 
counties of Trondhjem and Baahus, and although the former 
was restored by the peace of Copenhagen, two years later, her 
population fell below half a million. The Swedes had now 
acquired the rich provinces in the south and south-west of the 
Scandinavian peninsula, and their ambition to extend their 
frontiers to the North Sea became more pronounced and more 
possible of accomplishment. From the middle of the 17th 
century, however, the Dutch and English made their influence 
felt, and the political status of Norway could no longer be 
regarded as a purely Scandinavian affair. The establishment 
of hereditary autocracy in Denmark by Frederick III. in 1660 
conferred many benefits upon Norway. Personal liberty perhaps 
suffered, but the Norwegian peasant remained a freeman while 
his counterpart in Denmark was a serf. Norwegian law was 
revised and codified under Christian V. (1670-1699), who was 
well served by the Norwegians in his attempt to regain the lost 
provinces. 

Under the sons of these monarchs, Frederick IV. and Carl 
XII., Norway was once more compelled to pay for Danish 
aggression. Her shipping was destroyed, and in 1716, 
when driven from continental Europe, the Swedish ceatury. 
hosts fell upon her. Two years later, however, the 
death of Carl XII. at the border fortress of Frederikshald 
averted the danger. During this war Peter Tordenskjold, the 
greatest among a long series of Norwegian heroes who served in 
the Danish fleet, won undying fame. Before the close of the 18th 
century something had been done towards dispelling the in- 
tellectual darkness. Holberg, though he flourished outside 
Norway, was at least born there, and by stemming the tide of 
German influence he made the future of Norwegian literature 
possible. At the close of the century Hans Nielson Hauge, the 
Wesley of Norway, appeared, while the growth of the timber 
trade with England gave r\se to a great increase in wealth and 
population. In a century and a half the number of the 
Norwegian people was doubled, so that by 1814 Norway 
comprised some 900,000 souls. In 1788 the oppressive law 
that grain should be imported into Norway only from 
Denmark was repealed, and thanks to Danish policy Norway 
actually drew financial profit from the wars of the French 
Revolution. 

The Norwegian national movement was to render a decade at 
the beginning of the 19th century more memorable in Norwegian 
history than any century which had passed since the Beginning 
Calmar Union. In 1800 the Danish government com- c fNor» 
mitted the Norwegians to the second Armed Neutrality, wegian 
and therefore to a share in the battle of Copenhagen, Dation £f enU 
by which it was broken up. It was not until 1807, movcmea 
however, that Norway was fully involved in the Napoleonic wars. 
Then, after the bombardment of Copenhagen, she was compelled 
by Danish policy to embrace the cause of Napoleon against both 
England and Sweden. Commerce was annihilated, and the 
supply of food failed. The national distress brought into the 
forefront of politics national leaders, among whom Count 
Hermann Jasper von Wedel-Jarlsberg was the most conspicuous. 
As yet, however, patriotism went no further than a demand for 
an administration distinct from that of Denmark, which was 
conceded in 1807, and for a university nearer home than Copen- 
hagen. In 181 1 the government assented to the foundation of 
the university of Christiania. (W. F. R.) 

1814-1 $07. — After a union of nearly 400 years between 
Norway and Denmark, the Danish king, Frederick VI., without 
consulting the Norwegians, ceo^ed Norway to Sweden Bvenrt 
by the treaty of Kiel (January r4, 1814). Some hading to 
time previously Sweden had joined the allies in their the union 
struggle against Napoleon, while Denmark had, un- "J //A 
wisely, sided with the French. In 1813 the Swedish Swedcn - 
crown prince, Bernadotte, afterwards King Carl XIV., 1 pro- 
ceeded to Germany and took command of one of the armies 
of the allies. After the power of Napoleon had been broken at 

	1 In 1810 he was elected heir to the Swedish throne, in succession 
	to the childless king Carl XIII., who died in 1818, 

the battle of Leipzig, he advanced against Denmark, and King 
Frederick soon saw himself compelled to accede to the cession of 
Norway, which had long been the aspiration of the Swedes, 
especially after the loss of Finland in 1809. In the treaty of Kiel 
Frederick VI. absolved the Norwegians from their oath cf 
allegiance, and called upon them to become the loyal subjects 
of the Swedish king. But the Norwegians, who had not been 
consulted in the matter, refused to acknowledge the treaty, 
declaring that, while the Danish king might renounce his right 
to the Norwegian crown, it was contrary to international law 
to dispose of an entire kingdom without the consent of its people. 
A meeting of delegates was convened at Eidsvold, not far from the 
Norwegian capital, where, on the 17th of May 1814, a constitu- 
tion, framed upon the constitutions of America, of France (1791), 
and of Spain (181 2), was adopted. Among its most important 
features are that the Storthing, or National Assembly, is a 
single-chamber institution, and that the king is not given an 
absolute veto, or the right to dissolve the Storthing. The 
Danish governor of Norway, Prince Christian Frederick, was 
unanimously elected king. Soon afterwards the Swedes, under 
the crown prince, invaded Norway. The hostilities lasted 
only a fortnight, when Bernadotte opened negotiations with 
the Norwegians. A convention was held at Moss, where it was 
proposed that the Norwegians should accept the Swedish king 
as their sovereign, on the condition that their constitution of the 
1 7th of May should remain intact, except with such alterations 
as the union might render necessary. An extraordinary Storthing 
was then summoned at Christiania, and on the 4th of November 
1814 Norway was declared to be "a free, independent, and 
indivisible kingdom, united with Sweden under one king." A 
month previously Prince Christian Frederick had laid down 
his crown and left the country. 

The union was more fully defined by the " Act of Union," 
which was accepted by the national assemblies of both countries 
in the following year. In the preamble to the act it is clearly 
stated that the union between the two peoples was accomplished 
" not by force of arms, but by free conviction," and the Swedish 
foreign minister declared to the European Powers, on behalf 
of Sweden, that the treaty of Kiel had been abandoned, and that 
it was not to this treaty, but to the confidence of the Norwegian 
people in the Swedish, that the latter owed the union with 
Norway. The constitution framed at Eidsvold was retained, 
and formed the Grundlov, or fundamental law of the kingdom. 
The union thus concluded between the two countries was really 
an offensive and defensive alliance under a common king, each 
country retaining its own government, parliament, army, navy 
and customs. 

In Sweden the people received only an imperfect and erroneous 
insight into the nature of the union, and for a long time believed 
it to be an achievement of the Swedish arms. They had hoped 
to make Norway a province of Sweden, and now they had entered 
into a union in which both countries were equally independent. 
During the first fifteen years the king was represented in Norway 
by a Swedish viceroy, while the government was, of course, 
composed only of Norwegians. Count Wedel Jarlsberg was the 
first to be entrusted with the important office of head of the 
Norwegian government, while several of Prince Christian 
Frederick's councillors of state were retained, or replaced by 
others holding their political views. The Swedish Count von 
Essen was appointed the first viceroy of Norway, and was 
succeeded two years afterwards by his countryman Count von 
Morner, over both of whom Count Wedel exercised considerable 
influence. 

During the first years of the union the country suffered from 
poverty and depression of trade, and the finances were in a 
Strained deplorable condition. The first Storthing was chiefly 
relations occupied with financial and other practical measures. 
between In order to improve the finances of the country a bank 
s/ortAtot. °* Norwav was founded, and the army was reduced to 
one half. The paid-up capital of the bank was pro- 
cured by an extraordinary tax, and this, together with the grow- 
ing discontent among the peasantry, brought about a rising in 
Hedemarken, the object of which was to dissolve the Storthing and 
to obtain a reduction in the taxation. The rising, however, soon 
subsided, and the bountiful harvest of 18 19 brought more prosper- 
ous times to the peasantry. Meanwhile, however, the financial 
position of the country had nearly endangered its independence. 
The settlement with Denmark with regard to Norway's share of 
the national debt common to both, assumed threatening propor- 
tions. In the interest of Denmark, the allied powers asked for a 
speedy settlement, and in order to escape their collective inter- 
vention, Bernadotte, who had now succeeded to the throne of 
Sweden and Norway, on the death (February 5, 181 8) of the old 
king Carl XIII., accepted England's mediation, and was enabled 
in September 1819 to conclude a convention with Denmark, 
according to which Norway was held liable for only 3,000,000 
specie dollars (nearly £700,000). But the Norwegians considered 
that this was still too much, and the attitude of the Storthing 
in 1821 nearly occasioned a fresh interference of the powers. 
The Storthing, however, yielded at last, and agreed to raise a 
loan and pay the amount stipulated in the convention, but the 
king evidently had his doubts as to whether the Norwegians 
really intended to fulfil their obligations. As his relations with 
the Storthing had already become strained, and as he was 
occupied at that time with plans, which it is now known meant 
nothing less than a coup d'ilat in connexion with the revision 
of the Norwegian constitution, he decided to adopt military 
preparations, and in July 1821 he collected a force of 3000 
Swedish and 3000 Norwegian troops in the neighbourhood of 
Christiania, ostensibly for the mere purpose of holding some 
manoeuvres. In a circular note (June 1) to the European 
powers, signed by the Swedish foreign minister, Engstrom — 
but it is not difficult to recognize the hand of the king as the 
real author — the minister complained bitterly of the treatment 
the king had met with at the hands of the Storthing, and repre- 
sented the Norwegians in anything but a favourable light to the 
powers, the intention being to obtain their sympathy for any 
attempt that might be made to revise the Norwegian constitution. 
About this time another important question had to be settled 
by the Storthing. The Storthings of 181 5 and 1818 had already 
passed a bill for the abolition of nobility, but the king had on 
both occasions refused his sanction. The Norwegians maintained 
that the few counts and barons still to be found in Norway were 
all Danish and of very recent origin, while the really true and 
ancient nobility of the country were the Norwegian peasants, 
descendants of the old jarls and chieftains. According to the 
constitution, any bill which has been passed by three successively 
elected Storthings, elections being held every third year, becomes 
law without the king's sanction. When the third reading of the 
bill came on, the king did everything in his power to obstruct 
it, but in spite of his opposition the bill was eventually carried 
and became law. 

In 1822 Count Wedel Jarlsberg retired from the government. 
He had become unpopular through his financial policy, and 
was also at issue with the king on vital matters. In Royai 
1821 he had heen impeached before the Rigsret, the proposals 
supreme court of the realm, for having caused the forconsti* 
state considerable losses. Jonas Collett (1772-1851) was ^jJJ£j 
appointed as his successor to the post of minister of 
finance. The king had by this time apparently abandoned his 
plan of a coup d'ital, for in the following August he submitted 
to the Storthing several proposals for fundamental changes 
in the constitution, all of which aimed at removing all that was 
at variance with a monarchical form of government. The 
changes, in fact, were the same as he had suggested in his circular 
note to the Powers, and which he knew would be hailed with 
approval by his Swedish subjects. When the Storthing met 
again in 1824 the royal proposals for the constitutional changes 
came on for discussion. The Storthing unanimously rejected 
not only the king's proposals, but also several others by private 
members for changes in the constitution. The king submitted 
his proposals again in the following session of the Storthing, and 
again later on, but they were always unanimously rejected. In 
1830 they were discussed for the last time, with the same result. 
The king's insistence was viewed by the people as a sign of 
absolutist tendencies, and naturally excited fresh alarm. In the 
eyes of the people the members of the opposition in the Storthing 
were the true champions of the rights and the independence which 
they had gained in 1814. 

For several years the Norwegians had been celebrating the 
1 7th of May as their day of independence, it being the anniversary 
TbekJag's °f * ne adoption of the constitution of 1814; but as the 
absolutist tension between the Norwegians and the king increased, 
tend- |h e latter began to look upon the celebration in the 
codes. jight of a demonstration directed against himself, 
and when Collett, the minister of finance, was impeached 
before the supreme court of the realm for having made certain 
payments without the sanction of the Storthing, he also con- 
sidered this as an attack upon his royal prerogatives. His 
irritation knew no bounds, and although ( CoIlett was acquitted 
by the supreme court, the king, in order to express his irritation 
with the Storthing and the action they had taken against one of 
his ministers, dissolved the national assembly with every sign 
of displeasure. The Swedish viceroy at the time, Count Sandels, 
had tried to convince him that his prejudice against the celebra- 
tion of the 17th of May was groundless, and for some years the 
king had made no objection to the celebration. In 1827 it was, 
however, celebrated in a very marked manner, and later in the 
same year there was a demonstration against a foolish political 
play called The Union, and this being privately reported to the 
king in as bad a light as possible, he thought that Count Sandels, 
who had not considered it worth while to report the occurrence, 
was not fitted for his post, and had him replaced by Count Beltzar 
Bojilaus Platen (1766-1829), an upright but narrow-minded 
statesman. Count Platen's first act was to issue a proclamation 
warning the people against celebrating the day of independence; 
and in April 1828 the king, against the advice of his ministers, 
summoned an extraordinary Storthing, his intention being to 
wrest from the Storthing the supremacy it had gained in 1827. 
He also intended to take steps to prevent the celebration of the 
1 7th of May, and assembled a force of 2000 Norwegian soldiers in 
the neighbourhood of the capital. The king arrived in Christiania 
soon after the opening of the extraordinary Storthing. He did 
not succeed, however, in his attempt to make any constitutional 
changes, but the Storthing met the king's wishes with regard to 
the celebration of the 17th of May by deciding not to continue 
the celebration, and the people all over the country quietly 
acquiesced. The following year trouble broke out again. The 
students had decided to celebrate the 17th of May with a festive 
gathering, which, however, passed off quietly. But large masses 
of the people paraded the streets, singing and shouting, and 
gathered finally in the market-place. There was a little rioting, 
_- and the police and the military eventually dispersed 

	« battle

the people and drove them to their homes with sword 
of the and musket. This episode has become known as the 
market- u battle of the market-place," and did much to 
place. increase the general ill-feeling against Count Platen. 

His health eventually broke down from disappointment and 
vexation at the indignities and abuse heaped upon him. He 
died in Christiania at the end of the year, and his post remained 
vacant for several years, the presidency of the Norwegian 
government in the meantime being taken by Collett, its oldest 
member. 

By the July Revolution of 1830 the political situation in 
Europe became completely changed, and the lessons* derived 
. ^ from that great movement reached also to Norway. 
political The representatives of the peasantry, for whom the 
power constitution had paved the way to become the ruling 
° ,the trv eIement in P<>li tica l life, were also beginning to dis- 
peasantry. ^^^ themselves in the national assembly, where 
they now had taken up an independent position against the 
representatives of the official classes, who in 1814 and afterwards 
had played the leading and most influential part in politics. This 
party was now under the leadership of the able and gifted Ole 
Ueland, who remained a member of every Storthing from 1833 to 
1869. The Storthing of 1833 was the first of the so-called 
" peasant Storthings." Hitherto the peasantry had never been 
represented by more than twenty members, but the elections in 
1833 brought their number up to forty-five, nearly half of the 
total representation. The attention of this new party was 
especially directed to the finances of the country, in the admini- 
stration of which they demanded the strictest economy. They 
often went too far in their zeal, and thereby incurred consider- 
able ridicule. 

About this time the peasant party found a champion in the 
youthful poet Henrik Wergeland, who soon became one of the 
leaders of the '" Young Norway " party. He was a \y C m. 
republican in politics, and the most zealous upholder land; op- 
of the national independence of Norway and of her posed by 
full equality with Sweden in the union. A strong e * ve *' 
opposition to Wergeland and the peasant party was formed by 
the upper classes under the leadership of another rising poet and 
writer, Johan Sebastian Welhaven, and other talented men, who 
wished to retain the literary and linguistic relationship with 
Denmark, while Wergeland and his party wished to make the 
separation from Denmark as complete as possible, and in every 
way to encourage the growth of the national characteristics and 
feeling among the people. He devoted much of his time, by 
writing and other means, to promote the education of the people; 
but although he was most popular with the working and poorer 
classes, he was not able to form any political party around him, 
and at the time of his death he stood almost isolated. He died 
in 1845, and his opponents became now the leaders in the field 
of literature, and carried on the work of national reconstruction 
in a more restrained and quiet manner. The peasant party still 
continued to exist, but restricted itself principally to the assertion 
of local interests and the maintenance of strict economy in 
finance. 

The violent agitation that began in 1830 died away. The 
tension between the king and the legislature, however, still 
continued, and reached its height during the session of 1836, 
when all the royal proposals for changes in the constitution were 
laid aside, without even passing through committee, and when 
various other steps towards upholding the independence of the 
country were taken. The king, in his displeasure, decided to 
dissolve the Storthing; but before it dispersed it proceeded to 
impeach Lovenskiold, one of the ministers, before the supreme 
court of the realm, for having advised the king to dissolve the 
Storthing. He was eventually sentenced to pay a fine of 10,000 
kroner (about £550), but he retained his post. Collett, another 
minister who had greatly displeased the king by his conduct, 
was dismissed; but unity in the government was brought about 
by the appointment of Count Wedel Jarlsberg as viceroy of 
Norway. From this time the relations between the king and the 
Norwegian people began to improve, whereas in Sweden he was, 
in his later years, not a little disliked. 

When the king's anger had subsided, he summoned the Stor- 
thing to an extraordinary session, during which several important 
bills were passed. Towards the close of the session an Tbe 
address to the king was agreed to, in which the ( Stor- national 
thing urged that steps should be taken to place Norway R*z 
in political respects upon an equal footing with Sweden, ««***™* 
especially in the conduct of diplomatic affairs with foreign 
countries. The same address contained a petition for the use* 
of the national or merchant flag in all waters. According to» 
the constitution, Norway was to have her own merchant flag, 
and in 1821 the Storthing had passed a resolution that the flag 
should be scarlet, divided into four by a blue cross with white 
borders. The king, however, refused his sanction to the resolu- 
tion, but gave permission to use the flag in waters nearer home; 
but beyond Cape Finisterre the naval flag, which was really the 
Swedish flag, with a white cross on a red ground in the upper 
square, must be carried. In reply to the Storthing's address the 
king in 1838 conceded the right to all merchant ships to carry the 
national flag in all waters. This was hailed with great rejoicings 
all over the country; but the question of the national flag for 
general use had yet to be settled With regard to the question 
raised in the address of the Storthing about the conduct of 
diplomatic affairs, and other matters concerning the equality of 
Norway in the union, the king in 1839 appointed a committee of 
four Norwegians and four Swedes, who were to consider and 
report upon- the questions thus raised. . 

During the sitting of this first " Union Committee " its powers 
were extended to consider a comprehensive revision of the Act 
d th f °* U 1 " 011 * ^ ta tne limitation that the fundamental 
King Cart conditions of the union must in no way be interfered 
Johan; with. But before the committee had finished their 
succeeded re port the king died (March 8th 1844), and was suc- 
by Oscar 1. cee( j e( j by ^is son Oscar I. According to the constitu- 
tion the Norwegian kings must be crowned in Throndhjem 
cathedral, but the bishop of Throndhjem was in doubt whether 
the queen, who was a Roman Catholic, could be crowned, and 
the king decided to forego the coronation both of himself and his 
queen. The new king soon showed his desire to meet the wishes 
of the Norwegian people. Thus he decided that in all documents 
concerning the internal government of . the country Norway 
should stand first where reference was made to the king as 
sovereign of the two kingdoms. After having received the report 
of the committee concerning the flag question, he resolved (June 
20th, 1844) that Norway and Sweden should each carry its own 
national flag as the naval flag, with the mark of union in the upper 
corner; and it was also decided that the merchant flag of the 
two kingdoms should bear the same mark of union, and that only 
ships sailing under these flags could claim the protection of the 
state. 

The financial and material condition of the country had now 
considerably improved, and King Oscar's reign was marked by 
the carrying out of important legislative work and reforms, 
especially in local government. New roads were planned and 
built all over the country, the first railway was built, steamship 
routes along the coast were established, lighthouses were erected 
and trade and shipping made great progress. The king's reign 
was not disturbed by any serious conflicts between the two 
countries. No change took place in the ministry under the 
presidency of the viceroy Lovenskiold upon King Oscar's 
accession to the throne, but on the death or retirement of some 
of its members the vacant places were filled by younger and 
talented men, among whom was Fredrik Stang, who in 1845 
took over the newly established ministry of the interior. During 
the Schreswig-Holstein rebellion (1 848-1 850) and the Crimean 
War King Oscar succeeded in maintaining the neutrality of 
Norway and Sweden, by which Norwegian shipping especially 
benefited. The abolition of the English navigation acts in 1850 
was of great importance to Norway, and opened up a great future 
for its merchant fleet. 

In 1826 a treaty had been concluded with Russia, by which 
the frontier between that country and the adjoining strip of 
Norwegian territory in the Polar region was definitely 
wnb l0aS delimited; but in spite of this treaty Russia in 185 1 
Russia. demanded that the Russian Lapps on the Norwegian 
frontier should have the right to fish on the Norwegian 
coast, and have a portion of the coast on the Varanger fjord 
allotted to them to settle upon. The Norwegian government 
refused to accede to the Russian demands, and serious complica- 
tions might have ensued if the attention of Russia had not been 
turned in another direction. While his father had looked 
to Russia for support, King Oscar was more inclined to secure 
western powers as his allies, and during the Crimean War he 
concluded a treaty with England and France, according to 
which these countries promised their assistance in the event of 
any fresh attempts at encroachment on Norwegian or Swedish 
territory by Russia. In consequence of this treaty the relations 
between Norway and Sweden and Russia became somewhat 
strained; but after the peace of Paris in 1856, and the accession 
of Alexander II., whose government was in favour of a peaceful 
policy, the Russian ambassador at Stockholm succeeded in 
bringing about more friendly relations. 

Owing to the king's ill-health, his son, the crown prince Carl, 
was appointed regent in 1857, and two years later, when King 
Oscar died, he succeeded to the thrones of the two countries as 
Carl XV. He was a gifted, genial and noble personality, and 
desired to inaugurate his reign by giving the Nor- Death of 
wegians a proof of his willingness to acknowledge the Oscar 1.; • 
claims of Norway, but he did not live to see his wishes accession 
in this respect carried out. According to the constitu- °'£ arf 
tion, the king had the power to appoint a viceroy for ' " 
Norway, who might be either a Norwegian or Swede. Since 1829 
no Swede had held the post, and since 1859 no appointment of a 
viceroy had been made. But the paragraph in the constitution 
still existed, and the Norwegians naturally wished to have this 
stamp of " provinciality " obliterated. A proposal for the 
abolishment of the office of viceroy was laid before the Question 
Storthing in 1859, and passed by it. The king, whose of Nor- 
sympathies on this question were known, had been wegian 
appealed to, and had privately promised that he would yicer °y* 
sanction the proposed change in the constitution; but as soon 
as the resolution of the Storthing became known in Sweden, a 
violent outcry arose both in the Swedish press and the Swedish 
estates. Under the pressure that was brought to bear upon the 
king in Sweden, he eventually refused to sanction the resolution 
of the Storthing; but he added that he shared the views of his 
Norwegian counsellors, and would, when " the convenient 
moment " came, himself propose the abolition of the office of 
viceroy. 

In the following year the Swedish government again pressed the 
demands of the Swedish estates for a revision of the Act of Union, 
which this time included the establishment of a Swcdisn 
union or common parliament for the two countries, on proposals 
the basis that, according to the population, there for re- 
should be two Swedish members to every Norwegian, vision of 
The proposal was sent to the Norwegian government, ^f? f 
which did not seem at all disposed to entertain it; but 
some dissensions arose with regard to the form in which its reply 
was to be laid before the king. The more obstinate members 
of the ministry resigned, and others, of a more pliable nature, 
were appointed under the presidency of Fredrik Stang, who 
had already been minister of the interior from 1845 to 1856. 
The reconstructed government was, however, in accord with the 
retiring one, that no proposal for the revision of the Act of Union 
could then be entertained. The king, however, advocated the 
desirability of a revision, but insisted that this would have to 
be based upon the full equality of both countries. In 1863 the 
Storthing assented to the appointment by the king of a Union 
committee, the second time that such a committee had been 
called upon to consider this vexatious question. It was not 
until 1867 that its report was made public, but it could not 
come on for discussion in the Storthing till it met again in 1871. 
During this period the differences between the two countries 
were somewhat thrust into the background by the Danish 
complications in 1 863-1864, which threatened to draw the two 
kingdoms into war. King Carl was himself in favour of a 
defensive alliance with Denmark, but the Norwegian Storthing 
would only consent to this if an alliance could also be effected 
with at least one of the western powers. 

In 1869 the Storthing passed a resolution by which its sessions 
were made annual instead of triennial according to the constitu- 
tion of 1 8 14. The first important question which the first yearly 
Storthing which met in 187 1 had to consider was once more the 
proposed revision of the Act of Union. The Norwegians had 
persistently maintained that in any discussion on this question 
the basis* for the negotiations should be (1) the full equality of the 
two kingdoms, and (2) no extension of the bonds of the union 
beyond the line originally defined in the act of 1815. However, 
the draft of the new act contained terms in which the supremacy, 
of Sweden was presupposed and which introduced important 
extensions of the bonds of the union; and, strangely enough, the 
report of the Union committee was adopted by the new Stang 
ministry, and even supported by some of the most influential 
newspapers under the plausible garb of " Scandinavianism." 
In these circumstances the " lawyers' party," under the leader- 
ship of Johan Sverdrup, who was to play such a prominent part' 
in Norwegian politics, and the " peasant party," led by Soren 
Jaabcek, a gifted peasant proprietor, who was also destined to 
become a prominent figure in the political history of the country, 
Pounds' f° rme d an alliance, with the object of guarding against 
tionoftae any encroachment upon the liberty and independence 
Norwegian which the country had secured by the constitution of 
na ^ naX 1814. This was the foundation of the great national 
p y * party, which became known as the " Venstre " (the 
left), and which before long became powerful enough to exert 
the most decisive influence upon the political affairs of the 
country. When, therefore, the proposed revision of the Act of 
Union eventually came before the Storthing in 1871, it was re- 
jected by an overwhelming majority. The position which the 
government had taken up on this question helped to open the 
eyes of the Norwegians to some defects in the constitution, which 
had proved obstacles to the development and strengthening of 
the parliamentary system. 

In 1872 a private bill came before the Storthing, proposing that 
the ministers should be admitted to the Storthing and take part 
in its proceedings. After a number of stormy debates, 
of admit- ^ e ki^ wa s successfully carried under the leadership 
tance of °f Johan Sverdrup by a large majority, but the govcrn- 
ministers ment, evidently jealous of the growing powers and 
to seats in influence of the new liberal party in the Storthing, 
thin 5 * 01 * ac * v ised tne king to refuse his sanction, although the 
government party itself had several times in the 
preceding half-century introduced a similar bill for admitting the 
ministers to the Storthing. At that time, however, the opposition 
had looked with suspicion on the presence of the ministers in the 
national assembly, lest their superior skill in debate and political 
experience should turn the scale too readily in favour of govern- 
ment measures. Now, on the contrary, the opposition had 
gained more experience and had confidence in its own strength, 
and no doubt found that the legislative work could better be 
carried on if the ministers were present to explain and defend 
their views; but the government saw in the proposed reform the 
threatened introduction of full parliamentary government, by 
which the ministry could not remain in office unless supported by 
a majority in the Storthing. Before the Storthing separated the 
liberals carried a vote of censure against the government; but 
the king declared that the ministers enjoyed his confidence 
and took no further notice of the vote. Two of the ministers, 
who had advised the ratification of the bill, resigned, however; 
and a third minister, who had been in the government since 
1848, resigned also, and retired from public life, foreseeing the 
storm that was brewing on the political horizon. Numerous 
public meetings were held all over the country in support of the 
proposed reform, and among the speakers was Johan Sverdrup, 
now the acknowledged leader of the liberal party, who was hailed 
with great enthusiasm as the champion of the proposed reform. 
This was the political situation when King Carl died (18th 
September 1872). He was succeeded by his brother, who ascended 
Death of the throne as Oscar II. In the following year he 
Carl gave his sanction to the bill for the abolition of the 
XV -' M<> office of viceroy, which the Storthing had again 
Oscar U. passed, and the president of the ministry was after- 
wards recognized as the prime minister and head of the 
government in Christiania. Fredrik Stang, who was the pre- 
sident of the ministry at the time, was the first to fill this office. 
In the same year Norway celebrated its existence for a thousand 
years as a kingdom, with great festivities. 

In 1874 the government, in order to show the people that they 
to some extent were willing to meet their wishes with regard to 
Proposals tne S reat Question before the country, laid before the 
by the Storthing a royal proposition for the admittance of the 
storthing ministers to the national assembly. But this was to 
tor tuU 5 e accompanied by certain other constitutional changes, 
confcuT sucn as S ivin S tne k* n S tne "S nt °f dissolving the Stor- 
thing at hispleasure, and providingfixed pensions for ex- 
ministers, which was regarded as a guarantee against the majority 
of the assembly misusing its new power. The bill which the 
government brought in was unanimously rejected by the Stor- 
thing, the conservatives also voting against it, as they considered 
the guarantees insufficient. The same year, and again in 1877, 
the Storthing passed the bill, but in a somewhat different form 
from that of 1872. On both occasions the king refused his 
sanction. 

The Storthing then resorted to the procedure provided by the 
constitution to carry out the people's will. In 1880 the bill was 
passed for the third time, and on this occasion by the 
overwhelming majority of 93 out of 113. Three veUh 
Storthings after three successive elections had now 
carried the bill, and it was generally expected that the king and 
his government would at length comply with the wishes of the 
people, but the king on this occasion also refused his sanction, 
declaring at the same time that his right to the absolute veto 
was " above all doubt." Johan Sverdrup, the leader of the 
liberal party and president of the Storthing, brought the question 
to a prompt issue by proposing to the Storthing that the bill, 
which had been passed three times, should be declared to be the 
law of the land without the king's sanction. This proposal was 
carried by a large majority on the 9th of June 1880, but the 
king and his ministers in reply declared that they would not 
recognize the validity of the resolution. 

From this moment the struggle 'may be said to have centred 
itself upon the existence or non-existence of an absolute veto on 
the part of the crown. The king requested the faculty straggle 
of law at the Christiania university to give its opinion between 
on the question at issue, and with one dissentient the the king 
learned doctors upheld the king's right to the absolute V 1 ^!^ 
veto in questions concerning amendments of the con- 
stitution, although they could not find that .it was expressly 
stated in the fundamental law of the country. The ministry also 
advised the king to claim a veto in questions of supply, which 
still further increased the ill-feeling in the country against the 
government, and the conflict in consequence grew more and more 
violent. 

In the midst of the struggle between the king and the Storthing, 
the prime minister, Fredrik Stang, resigned, and Christian 
August Selmer (18 16-1889) became his successor; 
and this, together with the appointment of another sjJ^ 5 
member to the ministry, K. H. Schweigaard, plainly 
indicated that the conflict with the Storthing was to be continued. 
In June 1882 the king arrived in Christiania to dissolve the 
Storthing, and on this occasion delivered a speech from the 
throne, in which he openly censured the representatives of the 
people for their attitude in legislative work and on the question 
of the absolute veto, the speech creating considerable surprise 
throughout the country. Johan Sverdrup and Bjornstjerne 
Bjornson, the popular poet and dramatist, called upon the 
people to support the Storthing in upholding the resolution of 
the 9th of June, and to rouse themselves to a sense of their 
political rights. The elections resulted in a great victory for the 
liberal party, which returned stronger than ever to the Storthing, 
numbering 83 and the conservatives only 3r. The ministry, 
however, showed no sign of yielding, and, when the new Storthing 
met in February 1883, the Odelsthing (the lower division of the 
national assembly) decided upon having the question 7^,^^^. 
finally settled by impeaching the whole of the ministry ment of 
before the Rigsret or the supreme court of the realm, ministers 
The jurisdiction of the Rigsret is limited to the trial ^^ 
of offences against the state, and there is no appeal /5 ^ 
against its decisions. The charges against the ministers 
were for having acted contrary to the interests of the country by 
advising the king to refuse his sanction — first, to the amendment 
of the law for admitting the ministers to the Storthing; secondly, 
to a bill involving a question of supply; and thirdly, to a bill 
by which the Storthing could appoint additional directors on the 
state railways. 

The trial of the eleven ministers of the Selmer cabinet began in 
May 1883 and lasted over ten months. In the end the The minis- 
Rigsret sentenced the prime minister and seven of his try sen- 
ministers to be deprived of their offices, while three, £^f *£ t 
who had either recommended the king to sanction e * sr * 
the bill for admitting the ministers to the Storthing,, or had 
entered the cabinet at a later date, were heavily fined. The 
excitement in the country rose to feverish anxiety. Rumours of 
all kinds were afloat, and it was generally believed that the king 
would attempt a coup tfttat. Fortunately the king after some hesi- 
tation issued (nth March 1884) an order in council announcing 
that the judgment of the supreme court would be carried into 
effect, and Selmer was then called upon to resign his position as 
prime minister. King Oscar, however, in his declara- 
tors- t j on upheld the constitutional prerogative of the 
Vheking. crown, which, he maintained, was not impaired by 

the judgment of the Rigsret. The following month the 
king, regardless of the large liberal majority in the Storthing, 
asked Schweigaard, one of the late ministers, whose punishment 
consisted in a fine, to form a ministry, and the so-called " April 
ministry " was then appointed, but sent in its resignation in 
the following month. Professor Broch, a former minister, next 
failed to form a ministry, and the king was at last compelled to 
appoint a ministry in accordance with the majority in the 
First Storthing. In June 1884 Johan Sverdrup was asked 

	Liberal

to form one. He selected for his ministers leading 
ministry men on the liberal side in the Storthing, and the first 
1884. liberal ministry that Norway had was at length 
appointed. The Storthing, in order to satisfy the king, passed 
a new resolution admitting the ministers to the national assembly, 
and this received formal sanction. 

During the following years a series of important reforms was 
carried through. Thus in 1887 the jury system in criminal 
matters was introduced into the country after violent opposition 
from the conservatives. A bill intended to give parishioners 
greater influence in church matters, and introduced by Jakob 
Sverdrup, the minister of education, and a nephew of the prime 
minister, met, however, with strong opposition, and was eventu- 
ally rejected by the Storthing, the result being a break-up of the 
ministry and a disorganization of the liberal party. In June 1889 
the Sverdrup ministry resigned, and a conservative one was 
formed by Emil Stang, the leader of the conservatives in the 
Storthing, and during the next two years the Storthing passed 
various useful measures; but the ministry was eventually 
wrecked on the rock of the great national question which about 
this time came to the front — that of Norway's share in the 
transaction of diplomatic affairs. At the time of the union in 
1814 nothing had been settled as to how these were to be con- 
ducted, but in 1835 a resolution was issued, that when the 
Theques' Swedish foreign minister was transacting diplomatic 
tion of matters with the king which concerned both countries, 
diplomatic or Norway only, the Norwegian minister of state in 
Zoon €nm attendance u P on tnc km S at Stockholm should be 
present. This arrangement did not always prove 
satisfactory to the Norwegians, especially as the Swedish 
foreign minister could not be held responsible to the Norwegian 
government or parliament. 

By a change in the Swedish constitution in 1885 the ministerial 
council, in which diplomatic matters are discussed, came to 
consist of the Swedish foreign minister and two other 
Tj 1 * . members of the cabinet on behalf of Sweden, and of 
claim. tne Norwegian minister at Stockholm on behalf of 
Norway. The king, wishing to remedy this disparity, 
proposed that the composition of the council should be determined 
by an additional paragraph in the Act of Union. The representa- 
tives of the Norwegian government in Stockholm proposed that 
three members of the cabinet of each country should constitute 
the ministerial council. To this the Swedish government was 
willing to agree, but on the assumption that the minister of foreign 
affairs should continue to be a Swede as before, and this the 
Norwegians, of course, would not accept. At the king's instiga- 
tion the negotiations with the Swedish government were resumed 
at the beginning of 1891, but the Swedish Riksdag rejected 
the proposals, while the Norwegian Storthing insisted upon 
" Norway's right, as an independent kingdom, to full equality 
in the union, and therewith her right to watch over her foreign 
affairs in a constitutional manner." The Stang ministry then 
resigned, and a liberal ministry, with Steen, the recognized 
leader of the liberal party after Sverdrup's withdrawal from 
politics, as prime minister, was appointed. 

The new ministry had placed the question of a separate minister 
of foreign affairs for Norway prominently in their programme, but 
little progress was made during the next few years. Q mm mm ot 
Another and more important question for the country, separate 
as far as its shipping and commerce are concerned, consular 
now came to the front. The Storthing had in 1891 sery,ce * 
appointed a committee to inquire into the practicability of 
establishing a separate Norwegian consular service, and in 1892 
the Storthing, acting upon the committee's report, determined 
to establish a consular service. The king, influenced bv public 
opinion in Sweden, refused his sanction, and the Norwegian 
government in consequence sent in their resignation, whereupon 
a complete deadlock ensued. This was terminated by a com- 
promise to the effect that the ministry would return to office on 
the understanding that the question was postponed by common 
consent. The following year the Storthing again passed a 
resolution calling upon the Norwegian government to proceed 
with the necessary measures for establishing the proposed 
consular service for Norway, but the king again refused to take 
any action in the matter. Upon this the liberal ministry resigned 
(May 1893), and the king appointed a conservative government, 
with Emil Stang as its chief. Thus matters went on till the end 
of 1894, when the triennial elections took place, with the result 
that the majority of the electors declared in favour of national 
independence on the great question then before the country. 
The ministry did not at once resign, but waited till the king 
arrived in Christiania to open the Storthing (January 1895). The 
king kept the country for over four months without a responsible 
government, during which time the crisis had become more acute 
than ever. A coalition ministry was at last formed, with 
Professor G. F. Hagerup as prime minister. A new committee, 
consisting of an equal number of Norwegians and Swedes, was 
appointed to consider the question of separate diplomatic 
representation; but after sitting for over two years the com- 
mittee separated without being able to come to any agreement. 

The elections in 1897 proved again a great victory for the liberal 
party, 79 liberals and 35 conservatives being returned, and in 
February 1898 the Hagerup ministry was replaced by a liberal, 
once more under the premiership of Steen. Soon afterwards the. 
bill for the general adoption of the national or " pure " flag, as 
it was called, was carried for the third time, and became law 
without the king's sanction. In 1898 universal political suffrage 
for men was passed by a large majority, but the proposal to 
include women received the support of only ^ votes. 

In January 1902, on the initiative of the Swedish foreign 
minister, another committee, consisting of an equal number of 
leading Norwegians and Swedes, was appointed by xhe 
the king to investigate the consular question. The crisis of 
unanimous report of the committee was to the effect Mfj 1 ' 
that " it was possible to appoint separate Norwegian 
consuls exclusively responsible to Norwegian authority and 
separate Swedish consuls exclusively responsible to Swedish 
authority." The further negotiations between the two govern- 
ments resulted in the so-called communique of the 24th of March 
1903, which announced the conclusion of an agreement between 
the representatives of the two countries for the establishment 
of the separate consular service. The terms of the comtnuniquS 
were submitted to a combined Norwegian and Swedish council 
of state on the 21st of December 1903, when they were unani- 
mously agreed to and were signed by the king, who commissioned 
the Norwegian and the Swedish governments to proceed with the 
drafting of the laws and regulations for the separate consular 
services. In due course the Norwegian government submitted 
to the Swedish government their draft of the proposed laws and 
regulations, but no reply was forthcoming for several months. 
About this time the Swedish foreign minister, Mr Lagerheim, 
who had zealously worked for a friendly solution of the consular 
question, resigned, and in November the same year Bostrom, the 
Swedish prime minister, suddenly submitted to the Norwegian 
government a number of new conditions under which the Swedish 
government was prepared to agree to the establishment of separate 
consuls. This came as a surprise to the Norwegians in view 
of the fact that the basis for the establishment of separate 
consuls had already been agreed upon and confirmed by the 
Jring in December 1903. According to Bostrom's proposals the 
.Norwegian consuls were to be placed under the control of the 
Swedish foreign minister, who was to have the power to remove 
any Norwegian consul. The Norwegians felt it would be beneath 

Jlhe dignity of a self-governing country to agree to the Swedish 
proposals, and that these new demands were nothing less than 
a breach of faith with regard to the terms of agreement arrived 
at two years before by both governments and approved and 
signed by the king. The Norwegian government would have 
.been perfectly justified if, after this, they had withdrawn from 
the negotiations, but they did not wish to jeopardize the oppor- 
tunity of arriving at a friendly settlement, and Hagerup, the 
Norwegian prime minister, proceeded to Stockholm to confer 
with Bostrom; but no satisfactory agreement could be arrived 
at. There was therefore nothing left but for the Norwegians 
to take matters into their own hands. 

On the 8th of February 1905 Hagerup announced to the 
Norwegian Storthing that the negotiations had fallen through, 
and on the 17th the Storthing decided unanimously to refer 
the matter to a special committee. Owing to some difference of 
opinion between the members of his ministry, Hagerup resigned 
on the 1 st of March and was succeeded by Christian Michelsen, 
who formed a ministry composed of members of both political 
parties. The special committee decided that a bill should be 
immediately submitted to the Storthing for the establishment of 
a Norwegian consular service and that the measure should come 
into force not later than the 1st of April 1906. An attempt was 
made by the Swedish crown prince, acting as Prince Regent 
during the king's illness, to enter into new negotiations with the 
Norwegian government, but the proposals were not favourably 
received in Norway. In April 1905 Bostrom resigned, which 
was considered to be a move on the part of Sweden to facilitate 
negotiations with Norway. The bill for the establishment of 
Norwegian consuls was passed by the Storthing without a 
dissentient voice on the 23rd of May, and it was generally 
expected that the king, who again had assumed the reins of 
government, would sanction the bill, but on the 27th of May, 
in spite of the earnest entreaties of his Norwegian ministers, 
the king formally refused to do so. The Norwegian Ministry 
immediately resigned, but the king informed the ministers that 
Deciarm- ne cou ^ not accept their resignation. They, however, 
Hon of declined to withdraw it. A few days afterwards the 
iadepead' Norwegian government informed the Storthing of the 
eace. king's refusal, whereupon the assembly unanimously 
agreed to refer the matter to the special committee. On the 
7th of June the Storthing met to hear the final decision of 
the government. Michelsen, the prime minister, informed the 
Storthing that all the members of the government had resigned 
in consequence of the king's refusal to sanction the consular 
law, that the king had declined to accept the resignation, and 
that, as an alternative government could not be formed, the 
union with Sweden, based upon a king in common, was con- 
sequently dissolved. The president of the Storthing submitted 
a resolution that the resigning ministry should be authorized to 
exercise the authority vested in the king in accordance with the 
constitution of the country. The resolution was unanimously 
adopted. 

King Oscar, on receiving the news of the action of the Nor- 
wegian Storthing, sent a telegraphic protest to the Norwegian 
prime minister and to the president of the Storthing. 
^pj»r* on ^ e Swedish government immediately decided to 
Sweden, summon an extraordinary session of the Swedish 
parliament for the 20th of June, when a special com- 
mittee was appointed to consider what steps should be taken by 
Sweden. On the 25th of July the report of the committee was 
laio>before the Riksdag, in which it was stated that Sweden 
could have no objection to enter into negotiations about the 
severance of the union, when a vote to that effect had been 
given by a newly-elected Storthing or by a national vote in the 
form of a referendum by the Norwegian people. The report 
was unanimously adopted by the Swedish Riksdag on the 27th 
of July, and on the following day the Norwegian Storthing 
decided that a general plebiscite should be taken on the 13th 
of August, when 368,211 voted in favour of the dissolution and 
only 184 against it. It was thereupon agreed that representatives 
of Norway and of Sweden should meet at Karlstad in Sweden 
on the 31st of August to discuss and arrange for the severance of 
the union. The negotiations lasted till the 23rd of September, 
though more than once they were on the point of being broken 
off. The agreement stipulated a neutral zone on both sides of the 
southern border between the two countries, the Norwegians 
undertaking to dismantle some fortifications within that zone. 
The agreement was to remain in force for ten years, and could 
be renewed for a similar period, unless one of the countries gave 
notice to the contrary. The Karlstad agreement was 
ratified by the Norwegian Storthing on the 9th of fi£l°°° f 
October and by the Swedish Riksdag on the 1 6th of the viu 
same month. On the 27th of October King Oscar 
issued a proclamation to the Norwegian Storthing, in which he 
relinquished the crown of Norway. The Norwegian government 
was thereupon authorized by the Storthing to negotiate with 
Prince Charles of Denmark and to arrange for a national vote as 
to whether or no the country would approve of his election for the 
Norwegian throne. The plebiscite resulted in 259,563 votes 
for his election and 69,264 against. On the 18th of November 
the Storthing unanimously elected Prince Charles as king of 
Norway, he taking the name of Haakon VII. On the 25th of 
November the king and his consort, Queen Maud, the youngest 
daughter of King Edward VII. of England, entered the Norwegian 
capital. Their coronation took place in the Trondhjem cathedral 
the following year. 

In 1907 parliamentary suffrage was granted to women with 
the same limitation as in the municipal suffrage granted to them 
in 1 901, viz. to all unmarried women over 25 years, who pay 
taxes on an income of 300 kroner (about £16) in the country 
districts and on 400 kroner (about £22) in the towns, as well as to 
all married women, whose husbands pay taxes on similar incomes. 
Norway was thus the first sovereign country in Europe where 
the parliamentary vote was granted to women. (H. L. B.) 

Norwegian Literature 

Early Norse literature is inextricably bound up with Icelandic 
literature. Iceland was colonized from Norway in the 9th 
century, and the colonists were drawn chiefly from the upper and 
cultured classes. They took with them their poetry and literary 
traditions. Old Norse literature is therefore dealt with under 
Iceland (q.v.). (See also Edda, Saga, Runes.) 

The modern literature of Norway bears something of the same 
relation to that of Denmark that American literature bears 
to English. In each case the development and separation of 
a dependency have produced a desire on the part of persons 
speaking the mother-tongue for a literature that shall express 
the local emotions and conditions of the new nation. Two notable 
events led to the foundation of a separate Norwegian literature: 
the one was the creation of the university of Christiania in 181 1, 
and the other was the separation of Norway from Denmark 
in 1814. Before this time Norwegian writers had been content, as 
a rule, to publish their works at Copenhagen. The first name 
on the annals of Danish literature, Peder Clausen, is that of a 
Norwegian; and if all Norse writers were removed from that 
roll, the list would be poorer by some of its most illustrious names, 
by Holberg, Tuliin, Wessel, Treschow, Steffens and Hauch. 

The first book printed in Norway was an almanac, brought 
out in Christiania in 1643 by a wandering printer named Tyge 
Nielsen, who brought his types from Copenhagen. But the first 
press set up definitely in Norway was that of Valentin Kuhn* 
brought over from Germany in 1650 by the theologian Christian 
Stephensen Bang (1 580-1678) to help in the circulation of his 
numerous tracts. Bang's Christianiae Stads Bcskrifuclse (1651), 
is the first book published in Norway. Christen Jensen (d. 1653) 
was a priest who collected a small glossary or glosebog of the local 
dialects, published in 1656. Gerhard Milzow (1620-1688), the 
author of a Presbyterologia Norwegica (1679), was also a Norse 
priest. The earliest Norwegian writer of any original merit was 
Dorthe Engelbrechtsdatter (1634-1716), afterwards the wife of 
the pastor Ambrosius Hardenbech. She is the author of several 
volumes of religious poetry which have enjoyed great popularity. 
The hymn- writer Johan Brunsmann (163 7-1 707), though a 
Norseman by birth, belongs by education and temper entirely 
to Denmark. Not so Petter Dass (164 7-1 708) (#.v.), the most 
original writer whom Norway produced and retained at home 
during the period of annexation. Another priest, Jonas Ramus 
(1640-1718), wrote Norriges Kongers Historic (History of the 
Norse Kings) in 1719, and Norriges Beskrivelse (1735). The 
celebrated missionary to Greenland, Hans Egede (1686-17 58), 
wrote several works on his experiences in that country. Peder 
Hersleb (1680-17 5 7) was the compiler of some popular treatises 
of Lutheran theology. Frederik Nannestad, bishop of Trondh- 
jem (1693-1774), started a weekly gazette in 1760. The 
missionary Knud Leem (1 697-1 774) published a number of 
works on the Lapps of Finmark, "one at least of which, his 
Beskrivelse over Finmarkens Lapper (1767), still possesses con- 
siderable interest. The famous Erik Pontoppidan (1698-1764) 
cannot be regarded as a Norwegian, for he did not leave Denmark 
until he was made bishop of Bergen, at the age of forty-nine. On 
the other hand the far more famous Baron Ludvig Holberg 
(1684-1754), belongs to Denmark by everything but birth, 
having left Norway in childhood. 

A few Norsemen of the beginning of the 18th century dis- 
tinguished themselves chiefly in science. Of these Johan Ernst 
Gunnerus (1718-1773), bishop of Trondhjem, was the first man 
who gave close attention to the Norwegian flora. He founded 
the Norwegian Royal Society of Sciences in 1 760, with Gerhard 
Schoning (1722-1780) the historian and Hans Strom (1726-1797) 
the zoologist. Peder Christofer Stenersen (1 723-1776), a writer 
of occasional verses, merely led the way for Christian Braumann 
Tullin (1728-1765), a lyrical poet of exquisite genius, who is 
claimed by Denmark but who must be mentioned here, because 
his poetry was not only mainly composed in Christiania, but 
breathes a local spirit. Danish literature between the great 
names of Evald and Baggesen presents us with hardly a single 
figure which is not that of a Norseman. The director of the 
Danish national theatre in 1771 was a Norwegian, Niels Krog 
Bredal (1733-17 78), who was the first to write lyrical dramas 
in Danish. A Norwegian, Johan Nordahl Brun (1745-1816), 
was the principal tragedian of the time, yi the French taste. 
It was a Norwegian, J. H. Wessel (1742-1785), who laughed this 
taste out of fashion. In 1772 the Norwegian poets were so 
strong in Copenhagen that they formed a Norske Selskab (Nor- 
wegian Society), which exercised a tyranny over contemporary 
letters which was only shaken when Baggesen appeared. Among 
the leading writers of this period are Claus Frimann (1 746-1829), 
Peter Harboe Frimann (1752-1839), Claus Fasting (1746-1791), 
Johan Wibe (1748-1782), Edvard Storm (1740-1794), C. H. Pram 
(1756-1821), Jonas Rein (1760-1821), Jens Zetlitz (1761-1821), 
and Lyder Christian Sagen (1 771-1850), all of whom, though 
Norwegians by birth, find their place in the annals of Danish 
literature. To these poets must be added the philosophers Niels 
Treschow (1 751-1833) and Henrik Steffens (1 773-1845), and in 
later times the poet Johannes Carsten Hauch (1790-1872). 

The first form which Norwegian literature took as an inde- 
pendent thing was what was called " Syttendemai-Poesi," or 
poetry of the 17th of May, that being the day on which 
"Trefoil.** -Norway obtained her independence and proclaimed 
her king. Three poets, called the "Trefoil," came 
forward as the inaugurators of Norwegian thought in 1814. 
( Of these Conrad Nicolai Schwach (1 793-1860) was the least 
remarkable. Henrik Anker Bjerregaard (1792-1842), born in 
the same hamlet of Ringsaker as Schwach, had a much brighter 
and more varied talent. His Miscellaneous Poems, collected at 
Christiania in 1829, contain some charming studies from nature, 
and admirable patriotic songs. He brought out a tragedy of 
Magnus Barfods Sdnncr (Magnus Barefoot's Sons) and a lyrical 
drama, Fjeldevenlyrel (The Adventure in the Mountains) (1828). 
He became judge of the supreme court of the diocese of Chris- 
tiania. The third member of the Trefoil, Mauritz Kristoffer 
Hansen (1 794-1842), was a schoolmaster. His novels, of which 
Ottar de Bretagne (1819) was the earliest, were much esteemed in 
their day, and after his death were collected and edited (8 vols., 
1855-1858), with a memoir by Schwach. Hansen's Poems, 
printed at Christiania in 1816, were among the earliest publi- 
cations of a liberated Norway, but were preceded by a volume 
of Smaadigte (Short Poems) by all three poets, edited by Schwach 
in 181 5, as a semi-political manifesto. These writers, of no great 
genius in themselves, did much by their industry and patriotism 
to form a basis for Norwegian literature. 

The creator of Norwegian literature, however, was the poet 
Henrik Arnold Wergeland (1 808-1 845) (g.fl.), a man of great 
genius and enthusiasm, who contrived within the limits 
of a life as short as Byron's to concentrate the labours Y et ? e ~ 
of a dozen ordinary men of letters. He held views in welhavea. 
most respects similar to those pronounced by Rousseau 
and Shelley. His obscurity and extravagance stood in the way 
of his teaching, and his only disciples in poetry were Sylvester 
Sivertson (1 800-1 847), a journalist of talent whose verses were 
collected in 1848, and Christian Monsen (1815-1852). 

A far more wholesome and constructive influence was that of 
Johann Sebastian Cammermeyer Welhaven (1 807-1 873) (g.v.), 
who was first brought to the surface by the conservative reaction 
in 1830 against the extravagance of the radical party. A savage 
attack on Henrik Wergeland J s Poetry , published in 1832, caused 
a great sensation, and produced an angry pamphlet in reply 
from the father, Nikolai Wergeland. The controversy became 
the main4;opic of the day, and in 1834 Welhaven pushed it into 
a wider arena by the publication of his beautiful cycle of satirical 
sonnets called Norges Dmmring (The Dawn of Norway), in which 
he preached a full conservative gospel. He was assisted in his 
controversy with Wergeland by Henrik Hermann Foss (1790- 
1853), author of Tidsnornerne (The Norns of the Age) (1835) 
and other verses. 

Andreas Munch (1811-1884) took no part in the feud between 
Wergeland and Welhaven, but addicted himself to the study of 
Danish models independently of either. m He published a 
series of poems and dramas, one of which latter, Kong t Munca. 
Sverres Ungdom (1837), attracted some notice. His popularity com- 
menced with the appearance of his Poems Old ana New in 1848. 
His highest level as a poet was reached by his epic called Konge- 
datterens Brudefart (The Bridal Journey of the King's Daughter) 
(1 861 ). Two of his historical dramas have enjoyed a popularity greatly 
in excess of their merit; these are Solomon de Caus (1854) and Lord 
William Russell (1857). 

	Minor dramatists. 

A group of minor poetical writers may now be considered. Magnus 
Brostrup Landstad (1 802-1 880) was born on Maaso, an island in the 
vicinity of the North Cape, and, therefore, in higher lati-
tudes than any other man of letters. He was a hymn-writer poets. 
of merit, and he was the first to collect, in 1853, the Norske 
Folkeviser or Norwegian folk-songs. Landstad was orderedby the 
government to prepare an official national hymn-book, which was 
brought out in 1861. Peter Andreas Jensen (1812-1867) published 
volumes of lyrical poetry in-i838, 1849, 1855 and 1861, and two 
dramas. He was also the author of a novel, En Erindring (A 
Souvenir), in 1857. Aasmund Olafsen Vinje (1818-1870) was a 
peasant of remarkable talent, who was the principal leader of the 
movement known as the " maalstrsev/ 1 an effort to distinguish 
Norwegian from Danish literature by the adoption of a peasant 
dialect, or rather a new language arbitrarily formed on a collation 
of the various dialects. Vinje wrote a volume of lyrics, which he 
published in 1864, and a narrative poem, Storegut (Big Lad) (1866), 
entirely in this fictitious language, and he even went so far as to 
issue in it a newspaper, Dolen (The Dalesman), which appeared from 
1858 to Vinje 's death in 1870. In these efforts he was supported t>y 
Ivar Aasen and by Krist offer Janson (b. 1841) the philologist, 
the author of an historical tragedy, Jon Arason (1867); several 
novels: Fraa Bygdom (1865); 'Tor grim (1872); Fra Dansketidi 
(1875); Han og Ho (1878); and Austanfyre Sol og Vestanfyre 
Maane (East of the Sun and West of the Moon) (1879); besides a 
powerful but morbid drama in the ordinary language of Norway, 
En Kvindeskjebne (A Woman's Fate) (1879). In 1882 he left Norway 
for America as a Unitarian minister, and from this exile he sent home 
in 1885 what is perhaps the best of his books, The Sa$a of the Prairie. 
Superior to all the preceding in the quality of his lyrical writing was 
the bishop of Christiansand, Jorgen Moe (1813-1882). He is, 
however, better known by his labours in comparative mythology, in 
conjunction with P. C. Asbjornsen (see Asbjornsen and Moe). 

The names of the Norwegians Ibsen (q.v.) and Bjornson (q.v.), in 
the two fields of the drama and the novel, stand out prominently in 
Modern tne Eu . ro Pean literature of the later 19th century; and 
novelists two w " ters °* novels who owe much to their example are 
and Jonas Lie (q.v.), and Alexander Kielland (1 849-1 906). 

Nicolai Ramm Ostgaard (1812-1872) to some extent pre- 
ceded Bjornson in his graceful romance En Fjeldbygd (A 
Mountain Parish), in 1852. Frithjof Foss (i830-i899),who 
wrote under the pseudonym of Israel Dehn, attracted notice by seven 
separate stories published between 1862 and 1864. Jacobine Camilla 
Collett (1813-1895), sister of the poet Wergeland, wrote Amtmandens 
Dotire (The Governor's Daughters) (1855), an excellent novel, and the 
first in Norwegian literature which attempted the tiuthful description 
of ordinary life. She was a pioneer in the movement for the emanci- 
pation of women in Norway. Anne Magdalene Thoresen (1810- 
1903)1 a Dane by birth, wrote a series of novels of peasant life in the 
manner of Bjornson, of whom she was no unworthy pupil. One of 
her best novels is Signes Historic (1864). She also wrote some lyrical 
poetry and successful dramas. The principal historian of Norway is 
„. Peter Andreas Munch (1810-1863), whose multifarious 

History, vvritings include a grammar of Old Norse (1847); a col- 
. lection of Norwegian laws until the year 1387 (1846-1849) ; 

a study of Runic inscriptions (1848); a history and description 
of Norway during the middle ages (1849); and a history of the 
Norwegian people in 8 vols. (1852-1863); Jakob Aall (1773-1844) 
was associated with Munch in this work. Christian Berg (1775- 
1852) was another worker in the same field. Jakob Rudolf Keyser 
1803-1864) printed and annotated the most important documents 
Jealing with the medieval history of Norway. Carl Richard Unger 
(b. 1 817) took part in the same work and edited Morkinskinna in 
1867. His edition of the elder Edda (1867) forms a landmark in the 
study of Scandinavian antiquities. Oluf Rygh (1833-1899) contri- 
buted to the archaeological part of history. The modem language of 
Norway found an admirable grammarian in Jakob Olaus Lokke 
(1829-1 881). A careful historian and ethnographer was Ludvig 
Kristensen Daa (1809-1877). Ludvig Daae (b. 18^4) has written 
the history of Christiania, and has traced the chronicles of Norway 
during the Danish possession. Bernt Moe (1 814-1850) was a careful 
biographer of the heroes of Eidsvold. Eilert Lund Sundt (1817- 
1875) published some very curious and valuable works on the 
condition of the poorer classes in Norway. Professor J. A. Friis 
(b. 1 821) published the folk-lore of the Lapps in a series of valuable 
volumes. The German orientalist, Christian Lassen (1800-1876) 
was a Norwegian by birth. Lorentz Dietrichson (b. 1834) wrote 
voluminously both on Swedish and Norwegian, chiefly on Norwegian 
art and literature. In jurisprudence the principal Norwegian 
authorities are Anton Martin Schweigaard (1808-1870) and Frederik 
Stang (1808-1884). Peter Carl Lasson (1798-1873) and Ulrik Anton 
Motzfelt ( 1 807-1 865) were the lights of an earlier generation. In 
medical science, the great writer of the beginning of the 19th century 
was Michael Skjelderup (1769-1852), who was succeeded by Frederik 
Hoist (1791-1871). Daniel Cornelius Danielsen (b. 1815) was a 
prominent dermatologist; but probably the most eminent of 
modem physiologists in Norway is Carl Wilhelm Boeck (1808-1875). 
The elder brother of the last-mentioned, Christian Peter Bianco 
Boeck (1798-1877), also demands recognition as a medical writer. 
Christopher Hansteen (1 784-1 873) was professor of mathematics at 
the university for nearly sixty years. Michael Sars (1 805-1869) 
obtained a European reputation through his invest igatrons in 
invertebrate zoology. He was assisted by his son Georg Ossian Sars 
(b. 1837). Baltazar Matthias Keilhau (1797-1858) and Theodor 
KjeruH (1 825-1 888) have been the leading Norwegian geologists. 
Mathias Numsen Blytt (1789-1862) represents botany. His Norges 
Flora, part of which was published in 1 861, was left incomplete at 
his death. Niels Henrik Abel (1 802-1 829) (q.v.) was a mathe- 
matician of extraordinary promise; Ole Jakob Broch (1818-1889) 
must be mentioned in the same connexion. Among theological 
writers may be mentioned Hans Nielsen Hauge (1771-1824), author 
of the sect which bears his name; Svend Borchman Hersleb (1784- 
1836); Stener Johannes Stenersen (1789-1835); Wilhelm Andreas 
Wexels (1 797-1866); a writer of extraordinary popularity; and 
Carl Paul Caspari (1 814-1892), a German of Jewish birth, who 
adopted Christianity and became professor of theology in the 
university of Christiania. 

The political crisis of 1 884-1885, which produced so remarkable 
an effect upon the material and social life of Norway, was not 
without its influence upon literature. There had 
H^ven^nu f°N° wcd to the g^ 1 generation of the 'sixties, led by 
* Ibsen and Bjornson, a race of entirely prosaic writers, 
of no great talent, much exercised with " problems." The 
movement which began in 1885 brought back the fine masters 
of a previous imaginative age, silenced the problem-setters, and 
encouraged a whole generation of new men, realists of a healthier 
sort. In 1885 the field was still held by the three main names of 
modern Norse literature — Ibsen, Bjornson and Lie. Henrik 
Ibsen proceeded deliberately with his labours, and his name at the 
same time grew in reputation and influence. The advance of 
Bjornstjerne Bjornson was not so regular, because it was dis- 
turbed by political issues. Moreover, his early peasant tales 
once more, after having suffered great neglect, grew to be a force, 
and Bjornson's example has done much to revive an interest 
in the art of verse in Norway. Jonas Lie, the most popular 
novelist of Norway, continued to publish his pure, fresh and 
eminently characteristic stories. His style, colloquial almost to 
a fault, has neither the charm of Bjornson nor the art of some 
of the latest generation. Ibsen, Bjornson and Lie continued, 
however, to be the three representative authors of their country. 
Kristian Elster (1841-1881) showed great talent in his pessimistic 
novels Tor a Trondal (1879) and Dangerous People (1881). 
Kristian Gloersen (b. 1838) had many affinities with Elster. 
Arne Garborg (185 1) was brought up under sternly pietistic 
influences in a remote country parish, the child of peasant 
parents, in the south-west corner of Norway, and the gloom 
of these early surroundings has tinged all his writings. The 
early novels of Garborg were written in the peasant dialect, 
and for that reason, perhaps, attracted little attention. It was 
not until 1890 that he addressed the public in ordinary language, 
in his extraordinary novel, Tired Men, which produced a deep 
sensation. Subsequently Garborg returned, with violence, to 
the cultivation of the peasant language, and took a foremost 
part in the maalstrav. A novelist of considerable crude force 
was Amalie Skram (1 847-1 905), wife of the Danish novelist, 
Erik Skram. Her novels are destitute of literary beauty, but 
excellent in their local colour, dealing with life in Bergen and the 
west coast. But the most extravagant product of the prosaic 
period was Hans Jaeger (b. 1854), a sailor by profession, who 
left the sea, obtained some instruction and embarked on literature. 
Jaeger accepted the naturalistic formulas wholesale, and outdid 
Zola himself in the harshness of. his pictures of life. Several of 
Jaeger's books, and in particular his novel Morbid Love (1893), 
were immediately suppressed, and can with great difficulty be 
referred to. Knud Hamsun (b. i860) has been noted for his 
egotism, and for the bitterness of his attacks upon his fellow- 
writers and the great names of literature. Hamsun is seen at 
his best in the powerful romance called Hunger (1888). A w T riter 
of a much more pleasing, and in its quiet way of a much more 
original order, is Hans Aanrud (b. 1863). His humour, applied 
to the observation of the Ostland peasants — Aanrud himself 
comes from the Gulbrandsdal — is exquisite; he is by far the 
most amusing of recent Norwegian writers, a race whose fault it 
is to take life too seriously. His story, How Our Lord made Hay 
at Asmund Bergemellum's (1887), is a little masterpiece. Peter 
Egge (b. 1869), a young novelist and playwright from Trondhjem, 
came to the front with careful studies of types of Norwegian 
temperament. In his Jacob and Christopher (1900) Egge also 
proved himself a successful writer of comedy. Gunnar Heiberg 
(b. 1857), although older than most of the young generation, 
has but lately come into prominence. His poetical drama, The 
Balcony, made a sensation in 1894, but ten years earlier his 
comedy of Aunt Ulrica should have awakened anticipation. 
His strongest work is Love's Tragedy (1904). Two young writers 
of great promise were, removed in the very heyday of success, 
Gabriel Finne (1866-1899) and Sigbjorn Obstfelder (1866-1900). 
The last mentioned, in The Red Drops and The Cross, published 
in 1897, gave promise of something new in Norwegian literature. 
Obstfelder, who died in a hospital in Copenhagen in August 1900, 
left an important book in MS., A Priest's Diary (1901). 

Verse was banished from Norwegian literature, during the 
years that immediately preceded 1885. The credit of restoring 
it belongs to Sigurd Bodtker, w T ho wrote an extremely naturalistic 
piece called Love, in the manner of Heine. The earliest real 
poet of the new generation is, however, Niels Collett Vogt (b. 
1864), who published a little volume of Poems in 1887. Arne 
Dybfest (1 868-1 892), a young anarchist who committed suicide, 
was a decadent egotist of the most pronounced type, but a 
poet of unquestionable talent, and the writer of a remarkably 
melodious prose. In 1891 was printed in a magazine Vilhelm 
Krag's (b. 1871) very remarkable poem called Fandango, and 
shortly afterwards a collection of his lyrics. Vogt and V. Krag 
continued to be the leading lyrical writers of the period, and 
although they have many imitators, they cannot be said to have 
found any rivals. Vilhelm Krag turned to prose fiction, and 
his novels Isaac Seehuusen (1900) and Isaac Kapergast (1901) 
'are excellent studies of Westland life. More distinguished as 
a novelist, however, is his brother, Thomas P. Krag (b. 1868), 
who published a series of romantic novels, of which Ada Wilde 
(1897) is the most powerful. His short stories are full of delicate 
charm. Hans E. Kinck (b. 1865) is an accomplished writer of 
short stories from peasant life, written in dialect. Bernt Lie 
(b. 1868) is the author of popular works of fiction, mainly for 
the young. Sven Nilssen (b. 1864) is the author of a very success- 
ful novel, The Barque Franciska (1901). With him may be 
mentioned the popular dramatist and memoir-writer, John 
Paulsen (b. 1851), author of The Widow's Son. Johan Bojer 
(b. 1872) has written satirical romances, of which the most 
powerful is The Power of Faith (1903). Jakob Hilditch (b. 
1864) has written many stories and sketches of a purely national 
kind, and is the anonymous author of a most diverting parody 
of banal provincial journalism, Tranviksposten (1 900-1 901). 

The leading critics are Carl Naerup (b. 1864) and Hjalmar 
Christensen (b. 1869), each of whom has published collections 
of essays dealing with the aspects of recent Norwegian literature. 
The death of the leading bibliographer and lexicographer of 
Norway, Jens Braage Halvorsen (1845-1900), inflicted a blow 
upon the literary history of his country; his Dictionary of 
Norwegian Authors (1885-1900) — left for completion by Halfdan 
Koht — is one of the most elaborate works of its kind ever 
undertaken. Among recent historians of Norway much activity 
has been shown by Ernst Sars (b. 1835) and Yngvar Nielsen 
(b. 1843). The great historian of northern jurisprudence was 
L. M. B. Aubert (1 838-1896), and in this connexion T. H. 
Aschehoug (b. 1822) must also be mentioned. The leading 
philosopher of Norway in those years was the Hegelian Marcus 
Jakob Monrad (b. 1816), whose Aesthetics of 1889 is his master- 
piece. 

The close of 1899 and the beginning of 1900 were occupied 
by a discussion, in which every Norwegian author took part, 
The as to the adoption of the landsmaal, or composite 
"maa/" dialect of the peasants, in place of the rigsmaal or 
Dano-Norwegian. Political prejudice greatly em- 
bittered the controversy, but the proposition that the 
landsmaal, which dates from the exertions of Ivar Aasen (q.v.) 
in 1850, should oust the language in which all the classics of 
Norway are written, was opposed by almost every philologist 
and writer in the country, particularly by Bjornson and Sophus 
Bugge (b. 1833). On the other side, Arne Garborg's was almost 
the only name which carried any literary weight. The maal 
has no doubt enriched the literary tongue of the country with 
many valuable words and turns of expression, but there the 
advantage of it ends, and it is difficult to feel the slightest 
sympathy with a movement in favour of suppressing the language 
in which every one has hitherto expressed himself, in order to 
adopt an artificial dialect which exists mainly on paper, and 
which is not the natural speech of any one body of persons 
throughout the whole of Norway. 

Authorities. — La Norvlge Httfraire, by Paul Botten-Hansen 
(1824-1869), is an admirable piece of bibliography, but comes down 
no farther than 1866. Jens Braage Halvorsen (1845-1000) left 
his admirable and exhaustive Norsk Forfatter-Lexikon t 1814-1880 
(Norwegian Dictionary of Authors) incomplete; but the work was 
continued by Halfdan Koht. _ See also Henrik Jaeger, Illustreret 
nor sk liter aturhistorie (Christiania, 1 892-1 896); to which an appendix 
Siste Tidsrum 1890-1904 was added by Carl Naerup in 1905; Ph. 
Schweitzer, Geschichte der skandinavischen Literatur (Leipzig, 1889); 
'F. W. Horn, History of the Literature of the Scandinavian North (Eng. 
trans., Chicago, 1884); Edmund Gosse, Northern Studies (2nd ed., 
■ 1882). (E. G.) 


NORWEGIAN SEA, the sea enclosed between Norway, the 
Shetland and Faeroe Islands, Iceland, Greenland, Spitsbergen 
and Bear Island. Its basin is bounded on the E. by the Spits- 

	controversy. 

bergen platform, the continental shelf of the Barents Sea and 
the Norwegian coast: on the S. and S.W. by the North Sea, 
the Wyville-Thomson ridge, the Faeroe-Iceland ridge and the 
Iceland- Greenland ridge; on the W. by the coast of Greenland 
and on the N., so far as is known, by a ridge extending from 
Greenland to Spitsbergen. The Norwegian Sea is thus placed 
between the basins of the Atlantic on the one side and of the 
Arctic Ocean on the other: the mean depth of the submarine 
ridge separating it from the former being about 300 fathoms, 
and from the latter probably about 400 fathoms. The basin 
itself consists of a series of deeps, separated from one another 
by transverse ridges. Nansen and Helland-Hansen give the 
following results of measurements of the area: 

Area of surface . . 2-58 million sq. km. 
Water area at 600 metres . 1-79 „ „ 
,, „ 1000 „ . 1-65 „ „ 
T , ,, 2000 „ . 1 -05 „ „ 
„ „ 3000 „ . 0-30 _ „ ,, 
Volume 4* 1 2 million cubic km. 
Mean depth .... 1600 metres. 

The Norwegian Sea forms the meeting-place of waters coming 
from the Atlantic and Arctic oceans, and it also receives coastal 
waters from the North Sea and connecting areas, and from the 
Barents Sea. As communication with other basins is cut off 
comparatively near the surface, the inflow and outflow of waters 
must take place entirely in the upper strata, and the isolated 
water in the deep basin has typical physical characters of its 
own. 

The distribution and circulation of these waters are of great com- 
plexity, and have formed the subject of study by oceanographers 
since the region was Prst opened up by the Norwegian North Atlantic 
Expedition, 1876-1878. Much fresh light has been thrown on the 
subject by the work of the International Council for the study of the 
sea, and more particularly by the Norwegian investigators Nansen 
and Helland-Hansen, whose report on Norwegian Fishery and Marine 
Investigations (vol. ii. No. 2, 1909) contains a complete survey of 
present knowledge. (H. N. D.) 


NORWICH, GEORGE GORING, Earl of ' (is83?-i663> f 
English soldier, was the son of George Goring of Hurstpierpoint 
and Ovingdean, Sussex, and of Anne Denny, sister of Edward 
Denny, earl of Norwich. He was knighted in 1608, and became 
a favourite at court, benefiting largely from monopolies granted 
by Charles I. He became Baron Goring in 1628, and privy 
councillor in 1639. When the troubles between Charles and his 
parliament became acute Goring devoted his fortune freely 
to the royal cause; and the king in November 1644 renewed 
for him the title of earl of Norwich which had become extinct 
at his uncle's death. He went with the queen to Holland in 
1642 to raise money for the king, and in the autumn of the next 
year he was seeking arms and money from Mazarin in Paris. 
His proceedings were revealed to the parliament in January 
1644 by an intercepted letter to Henrietta Maria. He was 
consequently impeached of high treason, and prudently remained 
abroad until 1647 when he received a pass from the parliament 
under a pretext of seeking reconciliation. Thus he was able to 
take a prominent part in the Second Civil War of 1648 (see 
Great Rebellion). He commanded the Kentish levies, which 
Fairfax dispersed at Maidstone and elsewhere, and was forced 
to surrender unconditionally at Colchester. He was condemned 
to exile in November 1648 by a vote of the House of Commons, 
but in the next month the vote was annulled. Early in the next 
year a court was formed under Bradshaw to try Norwich and 
four others. All five were condemned to death on the 6th of 
March, but petitions for mercy were presented to parliament, 
and Norwich's life was spared by the Speaker's casting vote. 
Shortly after his liberation from prison in May he joined the 
exiled court of Charles II., by whom he was employed in fruitless 
negotiations with the duke of Lorraine. He became captain 
of the king's guard at the Restoration, and in consideration of 
the fortune he had expended in the king's service a pension of 
£2000 a year was granted him. He died at Brentford on the 
6th of January 1663. By his wife Mary Nevill (d. 1648), daughter 
of the 6th Lord Abergavenny, he had four daughters and two 
sons: George, Lord Goring (q.v.); and Charles, who fought 
in the Civil War, succeeded his father in the earldom, and 
died without heirs in March 1671. 


NORWICH, a city and one of the county-seats of New London 
county, Connecticut, U.S.A., in the township of Norwich, at the 
point where the Yantic (which expands here in " The Cove ") 
and Shetucket rivers join and form the Thames. Pop, (1000) 
of the township, 24,637, which included that of the city (17,251, 
including 4597 foreign-born); (1910) of the city, 20,367, and of the 
township, 28,219. The city area in 1906 was 5-63 sq. m. Norwich 
is served by the New York, New Haven & Hartford and the 
Central Vermont railways, by steamers from New York and 
New London, and by interurban electric lines connecting with 
Willimantic, New London and other neighbouring places. The 
city is at the head of navigation on the Thames river, whose 
channel is 100-200 ft. wide and 14 ft. deep. The residential 
and older portion of the city is built on the rising ground between 
the valleys of the two streams; along their banks lies the 
business district. In Sachem Street is the grave of Uncas 
(d. c. 1682), a Mohegan Indian chief and friend of the early 
settlers; the corner-stone of the granite monument over the 
grave was laid by President Andrew Jackson in 1833. North-east 
of the Roman Catholic Cemetery, in the extreme eastern part of the 
city, is a monument to Miantonomo, a sachem of the Narragan- 
set tribe of Indians, who was put to death here. Among the 
principal buildings and institutions are the Congregational 
Church, organized in 1660; the Norwich Free Academy (1856) 
and its Slater Memorial Hall, in which are the Peck Library 
and an Art Museum, and the Converse Art Annex and Art 
Collection; the Otis Public Library (1848); the William W. 
Backus Hospital; a state hospital for the insane and a state 

I armoury. In the 18th century, and early in the 19th, Norwich 
had a lucrative trade with the Atlantic ports and the West 
Indies, but later manufacturing became the most important 
industry; the manufactures including textiles, cutlery, fire- 
arms, paper, electrical supplies, printing presses, &c. In 
1905 the factory products were valued at $6,022,391. With 
the city's growth in manufacturing there has been a large 
increase in the foreign element in the population. The muni- 
cipality owns and operates the waterworks, and gas and electric- 
lighting plants. 

Norwich was settled in 1659 by colonists from Saybrook 
under the leadership of Captain John Mason (1600-1672), who 
had crushed the power of the Pequot Indians in Connecticut 
in 1637, and the Rev. James Fitch (1622-1702), who became 
a missionary to the Mohegans. 1 The tract was purchased from 
the Mohegan chiefs, Uncas, Owaneco and Attawanhood, and 
the settlement was called Mohegan until 1662, when the present 
name was adopted. During and preceding the War of Independ- 
ence the citizens of Norwich were ardent Whigs, various members 
of the well-known Huntington family being among their leaders. 2 
In December 1767, in reply to a message from Boston, a town- 
meeting forbade the use of tea, wines, liquors and foreign 
manufactures; in 1770 all citizens were forbidden to hold 

	1 The principal village of the Mohegans was originally, it seems, 
	on the site of Norwich. Subsequently the village of Mohegan (on 
	the W. bank of the Thames, about 3 m. S. of Norwich) became their 
	principal settlement, and the remnant, numbering arxnrt 100 indi- 
	viduals of mixed blood in 1904, still live here and in the vicinity. 

	* Norwich was the birthplace of Benjamin Huntington (1736- 
	1800), a member of the Continental Congress in i78o-i784and 1787- 
	»I788, a representative in Congress in 1 789-1 791, judge of the state 
	superior court in 1 793-1 798, and first mayor of Norwich in 1784- 
	1796; of Jabez Huntington (1710-1786), a patriot leader and major- 
	general of Connecticut militia during the War of Independence; of 
	his son, Jedediah Huntington (1743-1818), also a patriot leader, a 
	brigadier-general in the Continental Army (1777-1783), and a founder 
	of the Society of the Cincinnati; of Jedediah's brother, Ebenezer 
	Huntington (1 754-1 834), a soldier and in 1810-1811 and 1817- 
	1819 a representative in Congress; and of Jedediah's nephew^ Jabez 
	Williams Huntington (1788-1847), a jurist, a representative in 
	Congress in 1 820-1 834, and a member of the U.S. Senate in 1840- 
	1847. Samuel Huntington (1731-1796) removed to Norwich about 
	1758, was a member of the Continental Congress in 1 776-1 783 and its 
	president in 1779-1781, was a signer of the Declaration of Independ- 
	ence, a justice of the supreme court of Connecticut in 1774-1784, 
	and governor of Connecticut in 1 786-1 796. 

intercourse with a schoolmaster who had continued to drink 
tea, and in r776 a town-meeting directed the town clerk to 
proceed with his duties without reference to the Stamp Act. 
Norwich was chartered as a city in 1784. Among the early 
settlers in Ohio many were inhabitants of Norwich. Benedict 
Arnold was a native of Norwich; Mrs Lydia H. Sigourney 
was born here in a house still standing; Donald G. Mitchell 
(" Ik Marvel ") was also born here; and Norwich was the 
home after 1825 of William Alfred Buckingham (1804-1875), 
war governor of Connecticut. 

See F. M. Caulkins, History of Norwich (Hartford, 1866). 


NORWICH, a city and county of a city, municipal, county 
and parliamentary borough, and the county town of Norfolk, 
England; 114 m. N.E. by N. from London. Pop. (1901), 
lir »733- It is served by the Great Eastern railway and also 
by the Midland and Great Northern joint line. The Great 
Eastern company owns the Thorpe and Victoria stations, and 
the joint line the City station. The city lies in the valley of the 
Wensum, which joins the Yare immediately below. The ancient 
city lay in a deep bend of the Wensum, and the walls (1294- 
1342), with their many towers and twelve gatehouses, of which 
fragments only remain, were 4 m. in circuit. These narrow 
limits, however, were long ago outgrown, for Evelyn writes in 
1 67 1 that " the suburbs are large, the prospects sweete, with 
other amenities, not omitting the flower gardens, in which all 
the inhabitants excel." The castle, standing high upon a steep 
mound, is still partly surrounded by earthworks and a ditch 
spanned by a very early bridge. Only the early Norman square 
keep remains, with four tiers of arcading without, and an ornate 
doorway into the great tower.. The building long served as a 
prison, but, on the erection of a new gaol without the city, was 
acquired in 1884 by the corporation and in 1894 adapted as a 
museum and art gallery. 

The cathedral church of the Holy Trinity lies between the 
castle and the river, on low ground. In 1094 the seat of the East 
Anglian bishopric was removed by Bishop Herbert de Lozinga 
or Lorraine from Thetford to Norwich, where in 1096 he laid 
the foundation of the cathedral and dedicated it in 1101, 
establishing at the same time a Benedictine monastery. As 
completed by his successor before the middle of the 1 2th century 
the cathedral in style was purely Norman; and it still retains 
its original Norman plan to a great degree. Changes and 
additions, however, were made from time to time — the Early 
English lady chapel (demolished about 1580) belonging to the 
middle of the 13th century; the Perpendicular spire, erected 
after the collapse of two previous spires of wood, to the 15th; 
the west window and porch and the lierne stone vaulting of the 
nave, with its elaborate 328 bosses, to the 15th, and to the 16th 
the vaulting of the transepts and Bishop Nix's chantry, whilst 
the fine cloisters, 175 ft. square, 12 ft. wide, with 45 windows, 
in style mainly Decorated, were begun in 1297 and not com- 
pleted till 1430. The following are the dimensions in feet of 
the cathedral: total length, 407; length of nave, 204; length 
of transepts, 178; breadth of nave and aisles, 72; total height 
of spire, 315 (in England exceeded by Salisbury only); height 
of tower, 1 40^; height of nave, 69 J; height of choir, 8$%. The 
chief entrance on the west is a Perpendicular archway, above 
which is an immense window filled with poor modern stained 
glass. The nave within is grand and imposing, of great length, 
divided by fourteen semicircular arches, whose massive piers 
are in two instances ornamented with spiral mouldings. The 
triforium is composed of similar arches. The side aisles are low, 
their vaultings plain. The choir, extending westward some way 
beyond the crossing, is of unusual length, and terminates in an 
apse. The oak stalls and misereres are very richly carved 
work of the 15th century. A curious quatrefoil, opening on the 
north side of the presbytery, beneath the confessio or relic 
chapel, deserves mention. There is a monumental effigy of 
Bishop Goldwell (c. 1499), and another of Bishop Bathurst 
(1837) by Sir F. Chantrey. Mural monuments are plentiful. 
Sir William Boleyn, great-grandfather of Queen Elizabeth, is 
buried on the south side of the presbytery, in the midst of which 
stood the tomb of Bishop Herbert, the founder. Of three 
circular apsidal chapels two remain; and in one — the Jesus 
chapel — the ancient colouring has been renewed. Two richly 
sculptured gateways lead to the cathedral — the Erpingham 
gate (1420) and the Ethelbert gateway (c. 1300). The bishop's 
palace and the deanery are buildings of high antiquity, but both 
have undergone many alterations. The latter has a well-restored 
chapel. A beautiful Early Decorated ruin in the palace garden, 
known as " Bishop Salmon's gateway," is supposed to have been 
the porch to the great hall (c. 13 19). The diocese covers nearly 
all Norfolk, the greater part of Suffolk, and a small part of 
Cambridgeshire. 

Of the remarkable number of churches, over forty in- all, 
St Peter Mancroft is by many esteemed the finest parish church 
in England. Measuring 212 by 70 ft., it has a richly ornamented 
tower and fleche, 148 ft. high, with a beautiful peal of twelve 
bells, a long, light clerestory of thirty-four windows, a fine 
carved oak roof, a remarkable font cover, and the tomb of Sir 
Thomas Browne (d. 1682). The majority of the Norwich 
churches are of Perpendicular flint work, mostly of the 15th 
century. St Andrew, St Stephen, St Michael Coslany, with the 
fine Perpendicular Thorpe chapel, St John Maddermarket, 
St Lawrence, St Giles, with a tower 126 ft. high, St Gregory, 
St Helen, St Swithin, and St Michael at Plea (so called from the 
archdeacon's court held here) are also noticeable. The Roman 
Catholic church of St John the Baptist, begun in 1884 from 
designs by Sir G. G. Scott, occupies a commandmgposition outside 
St Giles's gate. At Carrow, E. of the city, there remain the hall, 
a decorated doorway, and other fragments of a Benedictine 
nunnery. 

The grammar school is a Decorated edifice, formerly a chapel 
of St John, of c. 13 1 6, with a " carnary " or crypt below. Among 
its scholars were Sir Edward Coke, Lord Nelson, Raja Brooke 
and George Borrow, the traveller and author, in whose work 
Lavengro (chap, xiv.) occurs a noteworthy description of Norwich. 
St Andrew's Hall (124 by 64 ft.) is the seven-bayed nave of the 
Black Friars' church, rebuilt with the aid of the Erpinghams 
between 1440 and 1470. It is a splendid specimen of Perpen- 
dicular work, with its twenty-eight clerestory windows and 
chestnut hammer-beam roof, and has served since the Reforma- 
tion as a public hall, in which from 1824 have been held the 
triennial musical festivals. It was restored in 1863. The guild- 
hall, on the site of an earlier tolbooth, is a fine flint Perpendicular 
structure of 1408-1413; the mayor's council-chamber, with 
furniture of the time of Henry VIII., is an interesting specimen 
of a court of justice of that period. The city regalia, kept here, 
include several objects of historical interest, amongst them a 
sword of a Spanish admiral captured by Nelson, with his auto- 
graph letter presenting it to the city, and a curious figure formerly 
used in the procession of the mayor elect through the city. 
Other public buildings include a shire ball, within the castle 
precincts, corn exchange, agricultural hall, volunteer drill hall, 
barracks and gaol on Mousehold Heath, the Norfolk and Norwich 
Library, rebuilt in 1900 after a fire, and a theatre. Educational 
establishments, besides the grammar school, include the Norwich 
and Ely Diocesan Training College, and the Municipal Technical 
Institute. The museum in the castle contains collections of 
British birds, insects, fossils, antiquities, and MSS. and early 
books. The chief charitable institutions are the Norfolk and 
Norwich Hospital, lunatic asylum, blind asylum and schools, 
Jenny Lind Infirmary for children, a soldiers' and sailors' 
institute, St Giles's or old men's hospital (an ancient foundation), 
and Doughty's Hospital (1687). 

The principal industries include foundries and engineering 
works, iron and wire fence works, brewing, brick works, chemical 
works, tanneries, and the production of mustard, starch, and 
crepe, gauze and lace; and there are large boot and shoe 
factories. The great cattle market lies below the castle. The 
municipal, county and parliamentary boroughs are coextensive. 
The parliamentary borough returns two members. The city 
is governed by a lord mayor (this title having been conferred 
in 1910), 16 aldermen and 48 councillors. Area, 7905 acres. 

History, — There is no conclusive evidence that Norwich 
(Northwic, Norwic) was an important settlement before the 
coming of the Angles. Caistor-by-Norwich, 4 m. S. of Norwich, 
is on the site of what was probably a Romano-British country 
town. A few Roman remains have been discovered in Norwich, 
itself, but not enough to indicate any real occupation or habita- 
tion. According to tradition UfTa made a fortification here 
about 570, but its history as a royal borough cannot be traced 
before the reign of ^Ethelstan (924-940), when it possessed a 
mint. After being destroyed by the Danes Norwich enjoyed 
a period of prosperity under Danish influence and was one of the 
largest boroughs in the kingdom at the Conquest. Ralph de 
Guader, earl of East Anglia under William I., formed the nucleus 
of a French borough with different customs from the English, 
and after his forfeiture, which involved the ruin of many of the 
old burgesses, a masonry castle was built and the centre of 
burghal life gradually transferred to the new community west 
of it. By 1 1 58, when Henry II. granted the burgesses a charter 
confirming their previous liberties, the two boroughs seem to 
have amalgamated. A fuller charter given by Richard I. in 
1 194 and confirmed by later sovereigns made Norwich a city 
enjoying the same liberties as London. From Henry IV. the 
citizens obtained a charter (1404), making their city a county 
with a mayor and two sheriffs instead of four bailiffs, and Henry 
V. added twenty-four aldermen and sixty common councilmen 
(1418). The cathedral precinct became parcel of the city at 
the Dissolution and in 1556 the neighbouring hamlets were 
incorporated in the county of Norwich. The charter of Charles II. 
(1683) remained in force till 1835, when one sheriff was removed 
and the number of aldermen, common councilmen and wards 
diminished. Since 1298 Norwich has been represented in parlia- 
ment by two members. Two annual fairs, existing before 1332, 
were formally granted to the city in 1482. One was then held 
in Lent, the other began on the feast of the Commemoration of 
St Paul (the 30th of June). These have been succeeded by the 
Maunday Thursday horse and cattle fair, and the pleasure 
fairs of Easter and Christmas. The market, which must have 
existed before the Conquest, was held daily in the 13th century, 
when citizens enclosed stalls by royal licence. Edward III. 
made Norwich a staple town, and the importance of its trade 
in wool and worsted dates from his reign. 

See Victoria County History, Norfolk', W. Hudson, Records of the 
City of Norwich (1906). 


NORWICH, a village and the county-seat of Chenango 
county, New York, U.S.A., on the Chenango river, 42 m. N.E. 
of Binghamton. Pop. (1910 census), 7422. It is served by 
the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western and the New York, 
Ontario & Western railways. The village has three parks, two 
libraries — the Guernsey Memorial Library and the D. L. Follett 
Memorial Law Library — and the Chenango Valley Home for 
Aged Women. Norwich is in a dairying and farming region, 
where hops especially are grown; and there are bluestone 
quarries in the vicinity. There are a variety of manufactures, 
and the New York, Ontario & Western has repair shops and 
division headquarters here. The first settlement was made in 
1792, and the village was incorporated in 1857. 


NORWOOD, a southern district of London, England, partly 
in Surrey and partly in the county of London (metropolitan 
borough of Lambeth). The district is hilly and well wooded, 
hence the name. It is divided into Upper, Lower and South 
Norwood, all consisting principally of villa residences and detached 
houses inhabited by the better classes. Among numerous 
institutions are almshouses for the poor of St Saviour's, South- 
wark, opened at South Norwood in 1863, a Jewish convalescent 
home in 1869, and the Royal Normal College and Academy of 
Music for the Blind at Upper Norwood in 1872. At Gipsy Hill, 
Upper Norwood, lived Margaret Finch, queen of the Gipsies, 
who died in 1740 at the age of 109, and was buried in the church- 
yard at Beckenham. 


NORWOOD, a township in Norfolk county, Massachusetts, 
about 14 m. S.W. of Boston. Pop. (1900) 5840 (1497 foreign- 
born); (1910) 8014; area about 10 sq. m. Norwood is served 
by the New York, New Haven & Hartford railway. The town- 
ship is traversed by the Neponset river. It has the Morrill 
Memorial Library (12,000 volumes in 1909). Norwood's manu- 
factories include printing-ink and glue factories, tanneries, an 
iron foundry, and the printing-presses and binderies of J. S. 
Cushing Co., H. M. Plimpton & Co., and the Norwood Press Co. 
Originally the South or Second Precinct of Dedham, Norwood 
was incorporated as a township (with the addition of a part of 
Walpole) under its present name in 1872. 

See D. Hamilton Hurd, History of Norfolk County, Massachusetts 
(Philadelphia, 1864). 


NORWOOD, a city of Hamilton county, Ohio, U.S.A., adjoining 
Cincinnati on the N. E. Pop* (1900), 6480 (718 foreign-born); 
(1910) 16,185. It is served by the Baltimore & Ohio South Western 
and the Cincinnati, Lebanon and Northern railways, and by 
interurban electric railways. Norwood has various manufactures, 
but as one of the hill suburbs of Cincinnati it is primarily a place 
of residence. It has a Carnegie library (a branch of the public 
library of Cincinnati) and a Catholic maternity hospital. Norwood, 
originally called Sharpsburg, was settled about 1798, laid out 
as a town in 1873, incorporated as a village in 1888, and chartered 
as a city in 1903. 


NORZAGARAY, a town of the province of Bulacan, Luzon, 
Philippine Islands, on the Quingua river, about 25 m. N. by E. 
of Manila. Pop. (1903), 513 1. The inhabitants are engaged 
chiefly in the cultivation of rice and Indian corn, and in lumber- 
ing; good timber grows on the neighbouring mountains, and 
some iron and gold have been found in this region. Near the 
town there is a sulphur spring. The language is Tagalog. 


NOSAIRIS (also known as Ansayrii, sometimes Ansariyeh), 
the people who inhabit the mountainous country of N. Syria, 
which is bounded on the S. by the north end of the Lebanon at 
the Nahr el-Kebir (Eleutherus), on the N. by Mt Casius, Antioch 
and the Nahr el-*Asi (Orontes). Various settlements of them 
are found also in Antioch itself and in Tarsus, Adana, and a few 
other places, while in harvest time they come down as far as the 
Biq'a (Buka*a). From the time of Strabo until about two 
centuries ago, the country was famed for its wine, but now more 
for its tobacco (especially at Latakia). The total number of 
Nosairis inhabiting this country is variously estimated at from 
1 20,000 to 1 50,000. 

The origin of the name Nosairi is uncertain. Among the more 
possible explanations is that the name is derived from that of 
Mahommed Ibn Nusair, who was an Isma'llite follower of the 
eleventh imam of the Shiites at the end of the 9th century. 
This view has been accepted by Nosairi writers, but they transfer 
Ibn Nusair to the 7th century and make him the son of the 
vizier of Moawiya I., while another tradition (cf. Abulfeda, Geog. 
vol. ii. p. ir, No. 7) identifies him with Nusair, a freedman 
of the caliph *Ali. It is, however, noteworthy that Pliny 
{Hist. nat. v. 81) gives the name Nazcrini to the inhabitants of 
this district. In this part of Syria paganism remained even 
up to the middle ages (cf. Archives de I'Orienl latin, vol. ii. 2, 
P- 375)i and there is a complete absence of churches of the 5th 
to the 7th centuries in these mountains. In the 7th century the 
Arabs invaded Syria, but do not seem to have got into these 
-mountains. At the end of the 10th century, however, the Isma*- 
Ilite propaganda won some success among the people. Their 
strongholds were taken by Raymond in 1099, and later Tancred 
secured the very summits. In 113 2-1 140 the Assassins {q.v.) 
gained possession of their chief towns, but Saladin recovered 
them in 1188. In 13 17 the sultan Bibars endeavoured to con- 
vert them to orthodox Islam, and built many mosques, but Ibn 
Batuta (i. 177) says they did not use them. A fatwa of 
Ibn Taimiyya (d. 1327) of this time shows that the Nosairis 
were regarded with fear and hatred by the orthodox. For the 
next 500 years they were given over to their own internal 
disputes, until they came under the power of Ibrahim Pasha 
in 1832. At the present time they are under the direct ad- 
ministration of the Turks. 

The religion of the Nosairis seems to have been almost the same 
in the first years of the 5th century a.h. (nth century a.d.) 
as it is to-day, judging by the references in the sacred books of 
the Druses. As set forth in their own sacred book, the Majmu\ 
it seems to be a syncretism of Isma*Ilite doctrines and the ancient 
heathenism of Harran. The ages of the world are seven in 
number, each of these having its own manifestation of deity. 
But the manifestation of the 7th age is not a Mahdi who is yet 
to come, but the historical person *Ali ibn abu T^lib. This is 
stated in the crudest form in Sura ir of the MajmU*: " I testify 
that there is no god but *Ali ibn abu Talib." \Ali is also called 
the Ma % na ("Idea"; cf. the Logos of the New Testament), 
hence the Nosairis are also called the Ma*nawiyya. *Ali created 
Mahomet, who is known as the Ism (" Name "), and a trinity is 
formed by the addition of Salman ul-FarisI, who is the B&b 
(" Door "), through whom the propaganda is made, and through 
whom one comes to God. A mysterious symbol much used in 
their ceremonies of initiation consists of the three letters K Ain, 
Mim t Sin, these being the initials of *Ali, Mahomet and Salman. 
Of these three, however, \Ali is the supreme. In Sura 6 of the 
Majmu % the Nosairi says: " I make for the Door, I prostrate 
myself before the Name, I worship the Idea." Each of the seven 
manifestations of God in the ages of the world has been opposed 
by an adversary. 

The Nosairis are divided into four sects. (1) The Haidaris 
(from the name haidari, " lion," given to \Ali on account of his 
valour) are the most advanced. (2) The Shamalis or Shamsis 
preserve many traces of the old nature-worship. *Ali {i.e. the 
supreme god) is the heaven, Mahomet is the sun, Salman the 
moon. (3) On the other hand the Kalazis, so named from a 
sheik Mahommed ibn Kalazi (cf. E. Salisbury in the Journal 
of the American Oriental Society, viii. 237), or Qamaris, hold 
that the supreme god (*Ali) is the moon, not the sun. Their 
poetry addressed to the moon is translated by C. Huart in the 
Journal asiatique, scr. vii. vol. xiv. pp. 190 ff. (4) The Ghaibis 
are worshippers of the air, for God is invisible. In this they come 
nearer to the ordinary Isma'ilite doctrine. Religion is restricted 
among the Nosairis to the initiated, who must be adults over 
fifteen years of age and of Nosairi parentage. The initiator, 
who must not be a relative, becomes a spiritual father, and the 
relation cannot be broken except by his consent. The initiation 
consists of three stages. In the first the novice is received and 
told to meditate on the three mystic letters; in the second, 
after a period of forty days, he is taught the titles of the 16 
suras of the Majmu*; in the third, after seven or nine months 
(intended to correspond with the ordinary period of gestation), 
he is taught Suras 5, 6 and 9, learns the meaning of the three 
mystic letters and goes through a further period of instruction 
from his initiator. The initiated are divided into two classes, 
the sheiks, who are recruited from the families of sheiks only, 
and the ordinary members. 

The Nosairis are believers in metempsychosis. The pious 
Nosairi takes his rank among the stars, but the body of the 
impious undergoes many transformations. 

Bibliogra phy. — Ren6 Dussaud, Histoire de la religion des Nosairis 
(Paris, 1900); St Guyard, " Le Fatwa d'lbn Taimiyyah sur les 
Nosairis," in Journal asiatique (ser. vi. vol. xviii. pp. 158 ff). List of 
forty Nosairi MSS. by J. Catafago in Journal asiatique (ser. vii. vol. 
viii. pp. 523 ff). C. Huart, " La Poesie religieuse des Nosairis," 
Journal asiatique (ser. vii. vol. xiv. pp. 190 ff). The Kitab ul Bakuta, 
containing the Majmu\ was published at Beirut, 1863, and trans- 
lated for the most part by E. Salisbury in the Journal of the Amer. 
Or. Soc. (viii. 227-308). (G. W.T.) 


NOSARI, or Navsari, a town in India, in the state of Baroda, 
on the left bank of the Purna river, 147 m. by rail N. of Bombay. 
Pop. (1901), 21,451. It is an ancient place, known to Ptolemy 
as Nasaripa. It was one of the earliest settlements of the 
Parsees in Gujarat, after their banishment from Persia in the 
1 2th century. It is still the home of their mobeds, or sacerdotal 
class, and contains their most venerated " fire temple." Many 
small industries are carried on, including the weaving of the 
kusti, or sacred thread of the Parsees. There is also considerable 
trade by both rail and water, for the river is navigable. The 
public buildings and the private houses, especially those in the 
suburbs, are unusually good. 


NOSE (O.Eng. nosu, cf. Dutch neus, Swed. nos, snout; the 
connexion with O.Eng. nosu is obscure, cf. Ger. Nose, Lat. nares, 
nostrils, nasus, nose, Fr. nez), the organ of the sense of smell 
{q.v.) in man and other animals (see Olfactory System). The 
projecting feature above the mouth, to which the word is usually 
restricted in man, is, in the case of the lower animals, called 
snout or muzzle, or, if much prolonged, proboscis or trunk. 
" Nostril," the external opening into the nose, is from O.Eng. 
nosthyrl (tkyrl or thirl, hole or opening). 


NOSOIJOGY (Gr. vbaos, disease, and \6yos, science), that 
branch of medical science which deals with the classification 
of diseases; the term is applied also to a collection of diseases, 
and to the special character of a particular disease and the 
different opinions concerning it. 


NOSSEN, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Saxony, 
pleasantly situated on the Freiberger Mulde, 51 m. S.E. from 
Leipzig by the railway to Dresden via Dobeln, and at the junction 
of a line to Moldau. Pop. (1905), 4879. It possesses an ancient 
castle crowning a height above the river, and has extensive 
manufactures of boots and shoes, leather and paper. In the 
immediate vicinity are the ruins of the Cistercian monastery 
of Altenzella, or Altzella, founded in 1145, and a noted school 
of philosophy during the I3th-i5th centuries. In the chapel, 
which was built in 1347 and restored in 1787, lie the remains 
of ten margraves of Meissen, members of the family of Wettin. 
The foundation was secularized in r544. The valuable annals, 
Chronicon vetere Cellense majus and Chronicon minus, giving 
a history of Saxony during the 13th and 14th centuries, were 
removed to the university library of Leipzig in 1544- They are 
printed in Band xvi. of the Monumenta Germaniae historica. 
scriptores (1859). 

See E. Beyer, Das Cisterciensttft und KlosUr Alt~Celle (Dresden, 
1855). 


NOSSI-B& properly Ndsy-be, i.e. " Great island," an island 
about 8 m. off the N.W. coast of Madagascar, in r3° 23' S., 
48 15' E. It is 14 m. long by 10 broad, and has an area of 130 
sq. m. Nossi-be is volcanic, the N. and S. parts of older, the 
central part of more modern date. Besides a number of true 
volcanic craters (Ldkobe, the highest point, is i486 ft. above the 
sea) there are numerous crater-lakes level with the ground 
(see Nature, March 1877, p. 417). The climate is similar to that 
of Mayotte (see Comoro Islands), and the neighbouring islet 
of Nossi-komba, about 2600 ft. above the sea, serves for a sana- 
torium. Pop. (1902), 9291. Hellville, the chief town (so called 
after De Hell, governor of Reunion at the time of the French 
annexation), is a port of call for the Messageries Maritimes and 
a centre for the coasting trade along the western shores of 
Madagascar. There is excellent anchorage, and a pier 800 ft. 
long. The soil is very fertile, and there are forests of palms and 
bamboos. The chief products are coffee, sesame, the sugar-cane, 
cocoa, vanilla and tobacco. There are numerous sugar factories 
and rum distilleries. 

In 1837 Tsiomeko, chieftainess of one of the numerous divisions 
of the western Malagasy known under the common name of 
Sakalava, was expelled by the Hova and fled to Nossi-b6 and 
Nossi-komba. Failing assistance from the imam of Muscat, 
she accepted French protection in r84o, ceding such rights as 
she possessed on the N.W. coast of the mainland. The French 
took possession in 1841, and in 1849 an unsuccessful attempt 
was made to expel them. The administration was entrusted 
to a subordinate of the governor of Mayotte until 1896, when 
Nossi-b6 was placed under the administration of Madagascar 
(q.v.). (J- Si.*) 


NOSTALGIA (Gr. vbaros, return home, and aXyos, grief), 
home-sickness, the desire when away to return home, amounting 
sometimes to a form of melancholia. 


NOSTRADAMUS (1503-1566), the assumed name of Michel 
de Notredame, a French astrologer, of Jewish origin, who was 
born at St Remi in Provence on the 13th of December 1503. 
After studying humanity and philosophy at Avignon, he took 
the degree of doctor of medicine at Montpellier in 1529. He 
settled at Agen, and in 1544 established himself at Salon near 
Aix in Provence. Both at Aix and at Lyons he acquired great 
distinction by his labours during outbreaks of the plague. In 
1555 he published at Lyons a book of rhymed prophecies under 
the title of Centuries, which secured him the notice of Catherine 
de* Medici; and in 1558 he published an enlarged edition with 
a dedication to the king. The seeming fulfilment of some of 
his predictions increased his influence, and Charles IX. named 
him physician in ordinary. He died on the 2nd of July 1566. 

The Centuries of Nostradamus have been frequently reprinted, 
and have been the subject of many commentaries. In 1781 they 
were_ condemned by the papal court, being supposed to contain a 
prediction of the fall of the papacy. Nostradamus was the author of 
a number of smaller treatises. See Bareste, Nostradamus (Paris, 
1840). 


NOSTRUM (neuter of Lat. noster, our), the name given. to 
preparations of which the ingredients are not made publicly 
known, a patent or " quack " medicine; it is taken from the 
label ( ;< of our own make ") formerly attached to such medicines. 


NOTARY, or Notary Public. In Roman law the notarius 
was originally a slave or frcedman who took notes (notae) of 
judicial proceedings in shorthand. The modern notary corre- 
sponds rather to the tabcllio or tabularius than to the notarius. 
In canon law it was a maxim that his evidence was worth that 
of two unskilled witnesses. 

The office of notary in England is a very ancient one. It 
is mentioned in the Statute of Pro visors, 25 Edward III. stat. 
4. The English notary is an ecclesiastical officer, nominated, 
since the Peterpence Dispensations Act 1 533-1 534, by the 
archbishop of Canterbury through the master of the faculties 
(now the judge of the provincial courts of Canterbury and York), 
in order to secure evidence as to the attestation of important 
documents. All registrars of ecclesiastical courts must be 
notaries. A notary's duties, however, are mainly secular. " The 
general functions of a notary consist in receiving all acts 
and contracts which must or are wished to be clothed with an 
authentic form; in conferring on such documents the required 
authenticity; in establishing their date; in preserving originals 
or minutes of them which, when prepared in the style and with 
the seal of the notary, obtain the name of original acts; and in 
giving authentic copies of such acts " (Brooke, On the Office 
of a Notary, chap. iii.). The act of a notary in authenticating 
or certifying a document is technically called a " notarial act." 
In most countries the notarial act is received in evidence as a 
semi-judicial matter, and the certificate of a notary is probative 
of the facts certified. But English law does not recognize 
the notarial act to this extent. An English court will, in certain 
cases, take judicial notice of the seal of a notary, but not that 
the facts that he has certified are true, except in the case of a 
bill of exchange protested abroad. 

The most important part of an English notary's duty is the 
noting and protest of foreign bills of exchange in case of non- 
acceptance or non-payment. This must be done by a notary in 
order that the holder may recover. He also prepares ship pro- 
tests and protests relating to mercantile matters, and authenti- 
cates and certifies copies of documents and attests instruments 
to be sent abroad. The office of notary is now usually held 
by a solicitor. In London he must be free of the Scriveners' 
Company. 

In Scotland, before the reign of James III., papal and imperial 
notaries practised until the 29th of November 1469, when an act 
was passed declaring that notaries should be made by the king. It 
would appear, however, that for some time afterwards there were 
in Scotland clerical and legal notaries — the instruments taken 
by the latter bearing faith in civil matters. In 1551 an act was 
passed directing sheriffs to bring or send both kinds of notaries 
to the lords of session to be examined; and in a statute, passed 
in 1555, it was ordained that no notary, " by whatsoever power 
he be created," should use the office " except he first present 
himself to the said lords, showing his creation, and be admitted 
by them thereto." It does not appear that this statute vested 
the right of making notaries in the court of session; but in 1563 
it was by law declared that no person should take on him the 
office, under the pain of death, unless created by the sovereign's 
special letters, and thereafter examined and admitted by the 
. lords of session. Since then the Court of Session has in Scot- 
land exercised exclusive authority on the admission of notaries 
in all legal matters, spiritual and temporal. The position of 
notaries in Scotland is somewhat higher than it is in England. 

In the United States, notaries are appointed by the governors 
of the states, and their authority to act is limited to the state 
to which they are appointed. They are state officers, and their 
duties in the main are attesting deeds and other instruments, 
and taking affidavits and depositions; all such documents 
which are intended to be used in the federal courts must have 
the notarial seal affixed. They also protest bills of exchange, and 
in some states they have the powers of a justice of the peace. 

In France, notaries receive all acts and contracts to which the 
parties thereto must give or desire to give the authenticity 
attached to the acts of a public authority; they certify the date, 
preserve the originals and give copies or duplicates. Notaries are 
nominated by the president of the republic on the recommenda- 
tion of the keeper of the seals. They cannot act as notaries and 
practise as advocates, or hold any magisterial office, nor must 
they engage in business. Notaries are divided into three classes: 
those of towns which have a court of appeal; those of towns which 
have a court of first instance; those of the other towns and com- 
munes. The first and second classes can practise wherever the 
jurisdiction of their courts extends; the third class only in their 
canton. They must obtain the sanction of the minister of 
justice should they desire to change from one district to another. 
They must serve an apprenticeship of six years (with exceptions) 
to a notary of the class to which they desire to belong. Every 
notary is bound in a certain sum fixed by the government as 
security for the due discharge of his duties. Since 1896 the 
remuneration of the more important classes of notaries has 
been regulated by law. Each district has a chamber of notaries, 
which exercises disciplinary powers over its members. 

In Germany, notaries are appointed by the president of the 
courts of law and the minister of justice in their respective 
states; they carry on their profession for their own benefit, 
and do not, except in Wurttemberg, receive any fixed salary, but 
take fees from the parties they represent. They may not refuse 
their services, save on good and sufficient ground. In some 
German states, notably Saxe-Weimar and Hesse-Darmstadt, 
there are no notaries. In Wurttemberg, Baden, Bavaria, 
Alsace-Lorraine, Rhenish Prussia and Austria, they form a 
distinct class, while in the other German states they generally 
combine the notarial office with that of advocate. There is no 
code of rules for the whole empire, the new Biirgerliches Gesetz- 
kbuch leaving it to each state to frame its own regulations. 
NOTE (Lat. nota, mark, sign, from noscere, to know), a mark, 
particularly a sign by which a musical sound (also called a note) 
is indicated in writing (see Musical Notation). The term is 
also applied to an abstract or memorandum of documents, 
speeches, &c. This appears to have been first in legal use, 
especially in the process of the transfer of land by fine and 
recovery (see Fine). Further extensions of this meaning are to 
an explanation, comment or addition, added in the margin or at 
the foot of the page to a passage in "a book, &c, or to a com- 
munication in writing shorter or less formal than a letter. 

The ordinary distinction between note and letter is reversed 
in diplomacy. Diplomatic notes are written communications 
» exchanged between diplomatic agents or between them and the 
ministers of foreign affairs of the government to which they are 
accredited; they differ from ordinary letters in having a more 
formal character and in dealing with matters of more immediate 
and definite importance: e.g. the notification of adhesion to a 
treaty, of the re-establishment of diplomatic relations after a 
war, &c. Sometimes, by agreement, a mere exchange of notes 
has the force of a convention. Collective notes are those signed by 
the representatives of several powers acting in concert. Some- 
times identical notes are substituted for collective, i.e. notes 
identical as to form and substance, but signed and delivered 
separately by the representatives of the several powers. Thus 
in 1822, at the congress of Verona, in order to overcome the 
objection of Great Britain to any interference of the European 
concert in Spain, identical notes were presented to the Spanish 
government instead of a collective note. Circular notes are 
those addressed by one power to the other powers generally, 
e.g. that addressed by Thiers (November 9, 1870), on the proposed 
armistice, to the representatives of the great powers accredited 
to the government of national defence. Confidential notes are 
directed to inspiring confidence by giving an explicit account 
of the views and intentions of the plenipotentiaries and their 
governments. Such a note was sent, for instance, by the 
plenipotentiaries of the allied powers at the conference of Poros, 
on the 8th of December 1828, to Capo d'Istria, the Greek presi- 
dent, to instruct him confidentially as to the results of their 
deliberations. The so-called notes verbales are unsigned, and are 
merely of the nature of memoranda (of conversations, &c). 
Notes ad referendum are addressed by diplomatic agents to their 
own governments asking for fresh powers to deal with points not 
covered by their instructions, which they have had to " refer." 
Diplomatic notes are usually written in the third person; but this 
rule has not always been observed (see P. Pradier-Fodere, Cours 
de droit diplomatique, Paris, 1899; vol. ii. p. 524). 

For notes of hand or promissory notes see Negotiable Instru- 
ments and Bill of Exchange, and for notes passing as currency see 
Banks and Banking, Bank-Note and Post. 


NOTHOMB, JEAN BAPTISTE, Baron (1805-1881), Belgian 
statesman and diplomat, was born at Messancy in Luxemburg 
on the 3rd of July 1805. He was educated at the Athenaeum of 
Luxemburg and the university of Liege. He was in Luxemburg 
when the revolution of August broke out, but was nominated 
a member of the commission appointed to draw up the con- 
stitution. He was a member of the national congress, and 
became secretary-general of the ministry of foreign affairs under 
Surlet de Chokier. He supported the candidature of the duke of 
Nemours, and joined in the proposal to offer the crown to Prince 
Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, being one of the delegates sent to 
London. When the Eighteen Articles were replaced by the 
Twenty-four less favourable to Belgium, he insisted on the 
necessity of compliance, and in 1839 he faced violent opposition 
to support the territorial cessions in Limburg and Luxemburg, 
which had remained an open question so long as Holland refused 
to acknowledge the Twenty-four Articles. His Essai historique 
et politique sur la revolution beige (1838) won for him the praise 
of Palmerston and the cross of the Legion of Honour from Louis 
Philippe. In 1837 he became minister of public works, and to 
him was largely due the rapid development of the Belgian 
railway system, and the increase in the mining industry. In 1840 
he was sent as Belgian envoy to the Germanic confederation, 
and in 1841, on the fall of the Lebeau ministry, he organized the 
new cabinet, reserving for himself the portfolio of minister of 
the interior. In 1845 he was defeated, and retired from parlia- 
mentary life, but he held a number of diplomatic appointments 
hefore his death at Berlin on the 6th of September 1881. 

See T. Juste, Souvenirs du baron Nothomb (Brussels, 1882). 


NOTICE, a term primarily meaning knowledge (Lat. notitia), 
as in " judicial notice "; thence it comes to signify the means 
of bringing to knowledge, as in " notice to quit "; at last it 
may be used even for the actual writing by which notice is given. 
The most important legal uses of the word are judicial notice 
and the equitable doctrine of notice. Judicial notice is the 
recognition by courts of justice of certain facts or events without 
proof. Thus in England the courts take judicial notice of the 
existence of states and sovereigns recognized by the sovereign 
of England, of the dates of the calendar, the date and place of 
the sittings of the legislature, &c. The equitable doctrine of 
notice is that a person who purchases an estate, although for 
valuable consideration, after notice of a prior equitable right, 
will not be enabled by getting in the legal estate to defeat that 
right. On the other hand, a purchaser for valuable consideration 
without notice of an adverse title is as a rule protected in his 
enjoyment of the property. Other common uses of the word 
are notice to quit, i.e. a notice required to be given by landlord 
to tenant, or by tenant to landlord in order to terminate a tenancy 
(see Landlord and Tenant) ; notice of dishonour, i.e. a notice 
that a bill of exchange has been dishonoured; notice of action, 
i.e. a notice to a person of an action intended to be brought 
against him, which is required by statute to be given in certain 
cases; notice of trial, i.e. the notice given by a plaintiff to a 
defendant that he intends to bring on the cause for trial; notice 
in lieu of personal service of a writ, i.e. by advertisement or 
otherwise; notice given by one party in an action to the other, 
at a trial, to produce certain documents in bis possession 
or power; notice to treat, given under the Land Clauses Acts 
by public bodies having compulsory powers of purchasing land 
as a preliminary step to putting their powers in force. Notice 
may be either express or constructive. The latter is where 
knowledge of a fact is presumed from the circumstances of the 
case, e.g. notice to a solicitor is usually constructive notice to 
the client. Notice in some cases may be either oral or written. 
It is usually advisable to give written notice even where oral 
evidence is sufficient in law, as in the case of notice to quit. 
The American use of notice is practically the same as in England. 


NOTKER, a name of frequent occurrence in the ecclesiastical 
history of the middle ages. Notker Balbulus (c. 840-912) was 
a native of northern Switzerland, and for many years magister 
in the school of St Gall. He compiled a martyrology and other 
works, but is famous for his services to church music and for the 
" sequences " of which he was the composer. He was canonized 
in 1513. His life is in the Bollandist Acta Sanctorum, April 
6th. Notker Labeo (d. June 29th, 1022) was also an instructor 
at St Gall. His numerous translations, including those of the 
Old Testament Psalms, the categories of Aristotle, the De 
nuptiis Mercurii et Philologiae of Martianus Capella, and the 
De consolatione of Boethius, into Old High German, may 
possibly have been the work of bis pupils. They possess con- 
siderable philological interest, and have been edited by E. G. 
Graff (Berlin, 183 7-1 847), and by P. Piper under the title 
Notkers und seiner Schule Schrijten (1883-1884). 

See J. Kelle, Die Sankt Galler deutschen Schriften und Notker 
Labeo (Munich, 1888); G. Meyer von Knonau, " Lebensbild des 
heiligen Notker," in Mitteil. Antiq. Gesellschaft Zurich (1877). 


NOTO, a city of Sicily, in the province of Syracuse, and 
20 m. S.W. of it by rail, 520 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 
22,564. The present town, rebuilt after the earthquake of 1693, 
has some fine buildings of the early 18th century. The older 
town lies 5 m. direct to the north (1378 ft.). It was the ancient 
Netum, a city of Sicel origin, left to Hiero II. by the Romans 
by the treaty of 263 B.C. and mentioned by Cicero as a foederata 
civitas (Verr. v. 51. 133), and by Pliny as Latinae conditionis 
(H.N. iii. 8. 14). The remains of this city are almost entirely 
hidden beneath the ruins of the medieval town, except three 
chambers cut in the rock, one of which is shown, by an inscription 
in the library at Noto, to have belonged to the gymnasium, 
while the other two were heroa, or shrines of heroes. But explora- 
tions have brought to light four cemeteries of the third Sicel 
period, and one of the Greek period, of the 3rd and 2nd centuries 
B.C. There are also catacombs of the Christian period and some 
Byzantine tombs. See P. Orsi in Notizie degli scavi, 1897, 
60-90. Four miles to the S. of Noto, on the left bank of the 
Tellaro (Helorus) (E. Pais, Atakta, Pisa, 1891, p. 75 seq.) stands 
a stone column about 35 ft. in height, which is believed to be 
a memorial of the surrender of Nicias. This is uncertain; but, 
in any case, in the 3rd century B.C. a tomb was excavated in 
the rectangular area which surrounds it, destroying apparently 
a pre-existing tomb. The later burial belongs to the necropolis 
of the small town of Heloron, 750 yds. to the S.E., some remains 
of which have been discovered. It was a small advanced post of 
Syracuse, belonging probably to the 6th century B.C. See P. 
Orsi in Notizie degli scavi, 1899, 241. 


NOTT, ELIPHALET (1773-1866), American divine, was born 
on the 25th of June 1773 at Ashford, Connecticut. He was 
left an orphan without resources, but graduated in 1795 at 
Brown University. In 1804 he became president of Union 
College, Schenectady, New York, a position which he held till 
his death on the 29th of January 1866. He found the college 
financially embarrassed, but succeeded in placing it on a sound 
footing. He was known also as the inventor of the first stove 
for anthracite coal. His publications include sermons, Counsels 
to Young Men (1S10), and Lectures on Temperance (1847). 

Life by C. van Santvoord (ed. Tayler Lewis, 1876). 


NOTT, SIR WILLIAM (1782-1845), English general, was the 
second son of Charles Nott, a Herefordshire farmer, who in 
1794 became an innkeeper at Carmarthen. William Nott was 
indifferently educated, but be succeeded in obtaining a cadet- 
ship in the Indian army and proceeded to India in 1800. In 
1825 he was promoted to the command of bis regiment of native 
infantry; and in 1838, on the outbreak of the first Afghan war, 
he was appointed to the command of a brigade. From April to 
October 1839 be was in command of the troops left at Quetta, 
where he rendered valuable service. In November 1840 he 
captured JChelat, and in the following year compelled Akbar 
Khan and other tribal chiefs to submit to the British. On 
receiving the news of the rising of the Afghans at Kabul in 
November 1841, Nott took energetic measures. On the 23 rd of 
December the British envoy, Sir William Hay Macnaghten, 
was murdered at Kabul; and in February 1842 the weak and 
incompetent commander-in-chief, General Elphinstone, sent 
orders that Kandahar was to be evacuated. Nott at once decided 
to disobey, on the supposition that Elphinstone was not a free 
agent at Kabul; and as soon as he heard the news of the massacre 
in the Khyber Pass, be urged the government at Calcutta to 
maintain the garrison of Kandahar with a view to avenging the 
massacre and the murder of Macnaghten. In March he inflicted 
a severe defeat on the enemy near Kandahar, and in May 
drove them with heavy loss out of the Baba Wali Pass. In 
July he received orders from Lord Ellenborough, the governor- 
general of India, to evacuate Afghanistan, with permission to 
retire by Kabul. Nott arranged with Sir George Pollock, now 
commander-in-chief, to join him at KabuL On the 30th of 
August he routed the Afghans at Ghazni, and on the 6th of 
September occupied the fortress, from which he carried away, 
by the governor-general's express instructions, the gates of the 
temple of Somnath; on the 17th he joined Pollock at Kabul. 
The combined army recrossed the Sutlej in December. Nott's 
services were most warmly commended; he was immediately 
appointed resident at Lucknow, was presented with a sword 
of honour, and was made a G.C.B. In 1843 he returned to 
England, where the directors of the East India Company voted 
him a pension of £1000 per annum. He died at Carmarthen 
on the 1st of January 1845. 

See Memoirs and Correspondence of Sir William Nott, edited by 
J. H. Stocqueler (2 vols., London, 1854); Charles R. Low, The 
Afghan War 1838-1842 (London, 1879), and Life and Correspondence 
of Sir George Pollock (London, 1873); Sir J.W. Kaye, History of 
the War in Afghanistan (2 vols., London, 1851). 


NOTTINGHAM, EARLS OF. The English title of earl of 
Nottingham has been held by different families, notably by the 
Mowbrays (1377 to 1475; merged in the Norfolk title from 
1397), the Howards (1596-1681), and the Finches (1681; since 
1729 united with that of Wincbilsea.). For the Howard line see 
the separate article below. Here only the ancestors of the Finch 
line are dealt with. 

Heneage Finch (1621-1682), first earl of Nottingham in 
the Finch line, lord chancellor of England, was descended from 
an old family (see Finch, Finch-Hatton), many of whose 
members had attained to high legal eminence, and was the eldest 
son of Sir Heneage Finch, recorder of London, by his first wife 
Frances, daughter of Sir Edmund Bell of Beaupr6 Hall, Norfolk. 
In the register of Oxford university he is entered as born in 
Kent on the 23rd of December 1621, and probably his native 
place was Eastwell in that county. He was educated at 
Westminster and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he remained 
till he became a member of the Inner Temple in 1638. He was 
called to the bar in 1645, and soon obtained a lucrative practice. 
He was a member of the convention parliament of April 1660, 
and shortly afterwards was appointed solicitor-general, being 
created a baronet the day after he was knighted. In May of the 
following year he was chosen to represent the university of 
Oxford, and in 1665 the university created him a D.C.L. In 
1670 he became attorney-general, and in 1675 lord chancellor. 
He was created Baron Finch in 1674, and earl of Nottingham 
in May 1681. He died in Great Queen Street, London, on the 
1 8th of December 1682, and was buried in the church of Raven- 
stone in Bucks. 

His contemporaries of both sides of politics agree in their high 
estimate of his integrity, moderation and eloquence, while his 
abilities as a lawyer are sufficiently attested by the fact that he is 
still spoken of as " the father of equity." His most important contri- 
bution to the statute book is The Statute of Frauds." While 
attorney-general he superintended the edition of Sir Henry Hobart's 
Reports (1671). He also published Several Speeches and Discourses 
in the Tryal 0} the Judges of King Charles L (1660) ; Speeclies to both 
Houses of Parliament (1679); Speech at the Sentence of Viscount 
Stafford (1680). He left Chancery Reports in MS., and notes on 
Coke's Institutes. 

Daniel Finch (164 7-1 730), second earl, son of the preceding, 
entered parliament for Lichfield in 1679. He was one of the 
privy councillors who in 1685 signed the order for the proclamation 
of the duke of York, but during the whole of the reign of James 
II. he kept away from the court. At the last moment he hesitated 
to join in the invitation to William of Orange, and after the 
abdication of James II. he was the leader of the party who 
were in favour of a regency. He declined the "office of lord 
chancellor under William and Mary, but accepted that of 
secretary of state, retaining it till December 1693. Under 
Anne he in 1702 again accepted the same office in the ministry 
of Godolphin, but finally retired in 1704. On the accession 
of George I. he was made president of the council, but in 1716 
he finally withdrew from office. He succeeded to the earldom 
of Winchilsea (with which the Nottingham title now became 
united) on the 9th of September 1729, and died on the 1st of 
January 1730. 


NOTTINGHAM, CHARLES HOWARD, ist Earl of 1 (1536- 
1624), English lord high admiral (also known as 2nd Lord 
Howard of Effingham), was the eldest son of William, ist Baron 
Howard of Effingham, lord high admiral, by his wife, Margaret, 
daughter of Sir Thomas Gamage of Coity in Glamorganshire, and 
was born in 1536. He was nearly connected with Queen Eliza- 
beth, his father's sister, Elizabeth Howard, being mother of Anne 
Boleyn. During Mary's reign he is said to have served at sea 
with his father, and on the accession of Elizabeth his kinship, 
together with his good looks and abilities, secured his early 
advancement. In 1559 he was sent as ambassador to France 
to congratulate Francis II. on his accession, and in 1569 was 
general of the horse under the earl of Warwick for suppressing 
the Roman Catholic rebellion in the north. The next year 
he commanded a squadron of ships to watch the Spanish fleet 
which came to conduct the queen of Spain from Flanders, on 
which occasion " His lordship, accompanied with 10 ships only 
of Her Majesties Navy Royal, environed their Fleet in a most 
strange and 'warlike sort, enforced them to stoop gallant and to 
vail their bonnets for the queen of England." 2 In the parlia- 
ments of 1563 and 1572 he represented Surrey, and succeeded 
to his father's title on the 29th of January 1573. He was 
installed a knight of the Garter on the 24th of April 1574, and 
made lord chamberlain of the household, an appointment which 
he retained till May 1585, when he became lord high admiral 
of England. He also filled the offices of lord lieutenant of Surrey 
and high steward of Kingston-upon-Thames. He was one 
of the commissioners at the trial of the conspirators in the 
Babington Plot and of Mary, queen of Scots, in 1586, and, accord- 
ing to Davison, Elizabeth's secretary of state, it was owing 
chiefly to his persuasion and influence that Elizabeth signed 
the death-warrant. 8 

In December 1587 he hoisted his flag on the "Ark." His 
letters at this time reflect vividly his sense of the impending 
danger. " For the love of Jesus Christ, Madam," he writes 
to Elizabeth, " awake thoroughly and see the villainous treasons 
round about you, against your Majesty and your realm, and 

	1 i.e. In the Howard line; see above. 

	2 Fuller's Worthies, ii. 361. 

	* Nicolas's Life of Davison, pp. 232, 258, 281. 

draw your forces round about you like a mighty prince to defend 
you. Truly, Madam, if you do so, there is no cause for fear." 4 
On the approach of the Armada on the 6th of July 1588, Howard 
describes thus the disposal of his forces: " I have divided 
myself here into three parts, and yet we lie within sight of one 
another, so as if any of us do discover the Spanish fleet we give 
notice thereof presently the one to the other and thereupon 
repair and assemble together. I inyself do lie in the middle 
of the channel with the greatest force. Sir Francis Drake hath 
20 ships and 4 or 5 pinnaces which lie beyond Ushant and Mr 
Hawkins with as many more lieth towards Scilly." 6 He directed 
the various engagements (see Armada), and stayed himself 
to conduct the attack on the " San Lorenzo," stranded off 
Calais, arriving in consequence at the great fight off Gravelines 
some time after the engagement had begun. His tactics have 
been criticized both by contemporary and by later authorities, 
but his position was a perilous one, opposed to an overwhelming 
force of the enemy, and rendered still more difficult by the 
queen's untimely economy, Howard himself contributing largely 
to the naval expenses and to the relief of the numerous seamen 
poisoned by bad food and landed at Margate. "It were too 
pitiful to have men starve after such a service." 6 Instead of 
risking all in a pitched battle with the enemy, a course which 
probably appealed more to his dashing subordinates, he resolved 
to pursue the less heroic method of " plucking their feathers 
little by little"; 7 and his prudence, while justified by the 
extraordinary results, was also greatly praised by so good a 
judge as Raleigh. Shortly afterwards, under Howard's directions, 
a " Relation of Proceedings " was drawn up (now printed in the 
Navy Records Society Publications, i. 1-18). 

In 1596 Howard and Essex commanded the expedition against 
Cadiz, when a squadron of the enemy's ships was destroyed 
and two of the number brought home. Howard's intention was 
to limit the expedition entirely' to naval operations, but 
Essex insisted on landing, and Howard, who had been specially 
charged by Elizabeth to protect her favourite, 8 was obliged to 
follow in his support. The town was sacked and the forts 
destroyed; the naval prizes, however, but for this diversion 
would have been more numerous. The council of war then 
refusing to countenance any further attempts on land, 
Howard and Essex returned with the expedition to England. 
On the 22nd of October 1596 Howard was created earl of 
Nottingham. 

In February 1598, on a scare of an intended invasion, he was 
ordered to take measures for the defence of the country, and 
again in 1599, when he was appointed "Lord Lieut. -general 
of all England," and exercised full authority both over the army 
and the navy. He took a leading part in suppressing the 
rebellion of Essex, and served as a commissioner on his trial in 
February 1601. In December 1602 he entertained Elizabeth 
at Arundel House, but made no attempt to rival the gorgeous 
and expensive entertainments given to the queen by some of 
his contemporaries. Elizabeth's favour, in his case, required no 
courting by such methods, and it was to Nottingham that she 
named James as her successor on her deathbed. He continued 
to hold his office as lord high admiral under the new king, and 
in 1605 was despatched as ambassador to Spain, where his great 
reputation, together with his amiable character, perfect temper 
and unfailing courtesy, secured the successful negotiation of 
peace. He served on numerous commissions, including those 
on the union of the two kingdoms in 1604, for the trial of the 
conspirators of the Gunpowder Plot and of Henry Garnett in 
1606, and for reviewing the articles and rules of the order of 
the Garter in 161 8, and he attended Princess Elizabeth on her 
marriage to the elector palatine with a squadron to Flushing 
in 1613. Nottingham, who, unlike many of the Howards, was 

	[4] Navy Records Society. Papers Relating to the Spanish Armada, 
	June 23rd, i. 225. 

	[5] Howard to Walsingham, July 6. lb. i. 245. 

	[6] lb. ii. 183. 

	[7] lb. i. 341 and CaL of State P. Dom. 1581-1500, p. 516. 

	•See H.'s letter to Essex on this subject, HisL.MSS. Comm. 
	Marquess of Salisbury's MSS. vi. 239. 

a staunch Protestant, 1 was commissioner in Surrey for inquiring 
after recusants, 3 and in the diocese of Winchester for hearing 
ecclesiastical causes; he sat on the government commission for 
discovering and expelling Roman Catholic priests, and was 
mentioned in 1602 from Douay as one of the three enemies most 
feared by the recusants. 3 

On the report of the commission on the navy in 161 8 and of 
the abuses then exposed, Lord Nottingham, though no blame 
was attached to himself, being now an old man over eighty years 
of age, vacated his office of lord high admiral, receiving the sum 
of £3000 with a pension of £1000, and being granted a special 
precedence, limited to his person, as earl of .Nottingham of the 
earlier Mowbray creation, and still keeping the lord-lieutenancy 
of Surrey. He died at Haling House, near Croydon, on the 14th 
of December 1624, and was buried at Reigate, a monument 
being afterwards placed to his memory in St Margaret's church 
at Westminster. He was a striking and almost heroic figure in 
the Elizabethan annals, no unworthy leader of such men as 
Drake, Hawkins and Raleigh, the defender of his country at 
a time of imminent peril, and by his splendid character and 
services he was placed beyond the reach of the intrigues and 
jealousies which troubled the reputation of many of his con- 
temporaries and above even the suspicion of ill-doing. 

Lord Nottingham married (1 ), in July 1 563, Catherine,daughter 
of Henry Carey, 1st Lord Hunsdon, cousin to the queen, by whom 
he had, besides three daughters, two sons — William, who died 
in his father's lifetime, and Charles (1 579-1642), who succeeded 
as second earl of Nottingham; and (2), when in his 68th year, 
Margaret, daughter of James Stuart, earl of Murray, by whom 
he had two sons, the youngest of whom, on the death of his 
half-brother without male issue, succeeded as third earl of 
Nottingham; on his dying childless in April 1681 the earldom 
became extinct, the barony of Effingham passing to the 
descendants of the first earl of Nottingham's younger brother, 
Sir William Howard, from whom the fourth earl of Effingham 
(creation of 1837) and 14th baron Howard of Effingham (b. 
1866), who succeeded in 1898, was descended. 


NOTTINGHAM, a city and county of a city, municipal, county 
and parliamentary borough, and county town of Nottingham- 
shire, England. Pop. (1901) 239,743. It stands on the left 
(north) bank of the Trent and its tributary the Leen. It is 
125 m. N.N.W. from London by the Midland railway, and is 
also served by the Great Central and Great Northern railways. 
Water communications are afforded by the Grantham canal 
eastward, by the Nottingham and Erewash canals westward, com- 
municating with the Cromford canal in Derbyshire, and by the 
Trent. The plan of the town is irregular, and the main thorough- 
fares are generally modern in appearance, many of the old narrow 
streets having been wholly altered or renewed. About the centre 
of the town is an open market-place some 5! acres in area, said 
to be the largest of its kind in England. Nottingham Castle 
occupies a fine site to the S., on an abrupt rocky hill. The ancient 
remains are not large, including only a restored Norman gateway 
and fragments of the fortifications. In 1878 the site was acquired 
on lease hy the corporation, and the building was opened as the 
Nottingham and Midland Counties Art Museum. The church of 
St Mary is a fine Perpendicular cruciform structure, with a 
central tower. St Peter's church is mainly Perpendicular, 
hut shows traces of an earlier building. St Nicholas' church, 
near the castle, is a plain building of brick dating from 1676. 
There are several handsome modern churches, among which is 
the Roman Catholic cathedral of St Barnabas, from the designs 
of A. W. Pugin, erected in 1 842-1 844. There are a large number 
of Nonconformist places of worship. The principal secular 
buildings are the guildhall and city sessions court (1887), tjie 
shire hall, the Albert Hall and the Exchange; there are two 
principal theatres, the Theatre Royal and the Empire Theatre. 
Among educational establishments the principal is University 
College, for which a fine range of buildings was opened in 1881, 

	1 See esp. his letter to Walsingham, Naval Record Soc. Pub. i. 65. 

	* Hist. MSS. Comtn. Marquess of Salisbury's MSS. iv. 203. 

	* Col. St Pap. Dotn. 1601-1603, p. 181. 

containing the free municipal library and the museum of natural 
history. The free grammar school, founded in 1513, for some 
time in disuse, was revived in 1807, and on its removal in 1868 
to new buildings, became known as the High School. There are 
also the Nottingham High School for girls; the blue-coat 
school, founded in 1723; the People's College, founded in 1846; 
two technical schools; the Congregational Institute; and the 
Nottingham school of art, for which a fine building was erected 
in 1865 in the Italian style. The Midland Baptist college was 
transferred from Chilwell to Nottingham in 1882. 

The General Hospital was founded in 1781, and there are the 
Nottingham and Midland eye infirmary, the county asylum 
and the Midland institution for the blind. The Arboretum and 
the Forest are the principal public pleasure-grounds; the county 
cricket club plays matches on the Trent Bridge ground, and there 
is a racecourse at Colwick, E. of the city. To the N.W., but 
within the city boundaries, are the industrial districts of Radford 
and Basford, beyond which lies Bulwell, with collieries, limestone 
quarries and earthenware manufactures. Bestwood Park, in 
the vicinity, contained a hunting lodge of Henry I., being included 
in Sherwood Forest. To the N., Sherwood is a growing resi- 
dential district; another extends towards Gedling on the E. 
Southward, across the Trent, West Bridgford is another large 
residential suburb. To the W. is Lenton, and Beeston has 
become a populous suburb mainly owing to the establishment of 
large cycle and motor works. 

Nottingham itself became an important seat of the stocking 
trade towards the close of the 18th century. It was here that 
Richard Arkwright in 1769 erected his first spinning frame, 
and here also James Hargreaves had the year previously removed 
with his spinning jenny after his machine had been destroyed by 
a mob at Blackburn. Nottingham has devoted itself chiefly to 
cotton, silk and merino hosiery. Up to 181 5 point lace was also 
an important manufacture. In 1808 and 1809 John Heathcoat 
obtained patents for machines for making bobbin net, which 
inaugurated a new era in the lace manufacture. The industries 
also include bleaching, the dyeing, spinning and twisting of silk, 
the spinning of cotton and woollen yarn, tanning, engineering and 
brewing, while cycle works and tobacco factories are important, 
and the industries have the advantage of the close proximity 
of coal-mines. Besides the general market there is a large cattle 
market. 

Nottingham received its style of a city and county of a city 
by letters patent of the 7th of August 1897. The parliamentary 
borough returns three members to parliament, being divided 
into W., E. and S. divisions. The city is governed by a mayor, 
16 aldermen and 48 councillors. Area, 10,935 acres. 

History. — The advantageous position of Nottingham (Snoten- 
gakam, Notingeham) on the Trent, where it was crossed by an 
ancient highway, accounts for its origin, whether in Roman or 
Saxon times. The Saxon form of the name is taken to refer to 
the caves, anciently used as dwelling-places, which were hollowed 
out of the soft sandstone. Examples of these occur in the Castle 
rock, in the Rock Holes W. of the castle, in the suburb of Sneinton 
and elsewhere. It was chosen by the Danes for their winter 
quarters in 868, and constituted one of their five burghs. In 922 
it was secured and fortified by Edward the Elder, who in 924 
built a second " burgh " opposite the first and connected with it 
by a bridge over the river. ^Ethelstan, the successor of Edward 
the Elder, established there a royal mint. In 1013 the town 
submitted to Sweyn. William I. erected a castle, and mention 
of a new borough occurs in Domesday Book, and this seems to be 
the first evidence of the existence of the " French borough " 
which grew up in Nottingham under the Normans, and was 
distinguished from the English borough by the different customs 
which prevailed in it. Parliaments were held at Nottingham in 
I 334, 1337 and 1357, and it was the scene of the conference of 
the judges with Richard II. in August 1387. Several important 
persons have been imprisoned in the castle, among others David 
II. of Scotland. Edward IV. assembled his troops at Nottingham 
in 1 461; and it was the headquarters of Richard III. before the 
battle of Bosworth in 1485. In 1642 Charles I. finally broke with 
the Parliament by setting up his standard at Nottingham, and 
during the ensuing Civil War the castle was held by each of the 
two parties more than once. In 1644 it was dismantled by 
Cromwell's orders. 

Henry II. granted the first extant charter, which confirmed 
to the burgesses the liberties they had under Henry L, referred 
to a market on Saturdays, and forbade the working of dyed cloth, 
except in Nottingham, within ten leagues of the borough. This 
was confirmed by John, who also granted a gild-merchant. 
Henry III. allowed the burgesses to hold the town in fee-farm, 
and Edward I. granted them a mayor and two bailiffs, one to 
be chosen from each borough. Henry VI. confirmed all preceding 
privileges, first incorporated the mayor and burgesses, and 
granted that the town, except the castle and the gaol, should be 
a county of itself. Two sheriffs were to replace the two bailiffs. 
This charter remained, except for temporary surrenders under 
Charles II. and James II., the governing charter of the corpora- 
tion until the Municipal Act of 1835. Nottingham returned 
two members to parliament from 1295 until 1885, when the 
number was increased to three. Edward I. granted an eight- 
days' fair in September and a fifteen-days' fair in November, 
the last altered by Richard II. to a five-days' fair in February. 
Two other fairs were granted by Anne; one large fair, Goose 
Fair, is still held. This begins on the first Thursday in October 
and lasts three days. The markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays 
are held by prescriptive right. Besides the Reform riots of 1831, 
Nottingham witnessed in 18 11 the Luddite disturbances. In 
1870 Nottingham was made the seat of a suffragan bishop of the 
diocese of Lincoln, but as it is now in the diocese of Southwell 
there is no suffragan bishopric. 

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, or Notts, an inland county of England, 
bounded N. W. by Yorkshire, W. by Derbyshire, S. by Leicester- 
shire and E. and N.E. by Lincolnshire. The area is 843-4 sq. m. 
The N. is included in the great plain of York, and in the extreme 
N. there is some extent of marshes. The valley of the lower 
Trent and that of the Idle are also very flat. In the S. W. between 
Nottingham and Warsop, the undulations swell into considerable 
elevations, reaching near Mansfield a height over 600 ft. This 
district includes the ancient Sherwood Forest (tf.v.). Some 
portions of it are still retained in their original condition, and 
there are many very old oaks, especially in the portion known as 
the Dukeries (q.v.). The county generally is finely wooded, 
although to the E. of the valley of the Soar there is a considerable 
stretch of wolds. The principal rivers are the Trent, the Erewash, 
the Soar and the Idle. The Trent, which enters the county near 
Thrumpton in the S.W., where it receives the Erewash from the 
N. and the Soar from the S., flows N.E. past Nottingham and 
Newark, where it takes a -more northerly direction, forming the 
N. part of the E. boundary of the county till it reaches the Isle 
of Axbolm (Lincolnshire). The Soar forms for a short distance 
the boundary with Leicestershire, and the Erewash the boundary 
with Derbyshire. The Idle, which is formed of several streams 
in Sherwood Forest, flows N. to Bawtry, and then turns E. to 
the Trent. 

Geology, — All formations, from Lower and Middle Coal Measures, 
overlain unconformably by Permian, to Lower Lias, crop out suc- 
cessively eastward across the county, with a general but slight dip 
away from the Pennine uplift. The strike of the Carboniferous rocks 
veers from S. to E. in the S.; that of younger formations bends to 
S.W. The Coal Measures, about 5000 ft. thick, continue the Derby- 
shire Coalfield. A boring at Ruddington proved the lowest measures, 
underlain by Millstone Grit. The remaining Lower and Middle 
Measures below the important Top Hard Coal, with the Kilburn, 
Main, Deep Hard and Soft Coals, crop out in the south and alone the 
Erewash Valley; higher strata farther N. All these consist of shale, 
clay and little sandstone. They contain Carbonicola acuta, C. 
robusta, Neuropteris hetcrophylla, Alethopteris and Lepidodendron, 
showing essentially non-marine conditions. But several thin marine 
beds occur. The highest measures, divisible into red Etruria Marls, 
Newcastle Sandstones and a red sandy Keele series have been 
proved underground in eastward succession. A thin basal breccia, a 
sandy and marly group, the Magnesian Limestone with Productus 
horrtdus and Schizodus obscurus (granular dolomite typically, its 
upper part locally a dolomitic sandstone, the Mansfield building- 
stone), red gypsiferous Middle Marls, an Upper Limestone, and 
Upper Red Marls, collectively 550 ft. thick in the north of Notting- 
hamshire, terminate a^ Permian outcrop continuous from Durham, 
but dying out at Nottingham. Only the lowest divisions persist so 
far. The more extensive Trias overlaps southward on to the Carbon- 
iferous. Its lower sandstones (Bunter, 600 ft. thick, consisting of 
Lower Red Sandstone with breccias, and Pebble Beds; Keuper 
Waterstones, 200 ft. in the east, mainly brown sandstones, con- 
glomeratic at the base and containing the fish Semionotus) form an 
undulating wooded district. Higher red and pale green Keuper 
Marl (700 ft.), with subordinate sandstonesand gypsum, makesa low 
agricultural tract on the E., traversed longitudinally by the Trent. 
Black Rhaetic shales succeed with Pteria {Avicula) conlorta, Proto- 
cardium rhaeticum and bone-beds, below light-coloured marls and 
limestones ("White Lias"). Lower Lias, almost up to the Semi- 
costalus zone, crops out within the county. The basal Planorbis zone 
contains argillaceous limestones, worked for hydraulic cement at 
Barnston, and saurian remains. Of two types of Glacial boulder- 
clay, mainly confined to the Triassic and Jurassic clays on the E. 
and S.E., one containing Carboniferous and some extraneous boulders 
probably came with the Pennine ice from the N.W. The other, 
uppermost where both occur, and full of chalk and flint, belongs to 
the Chalky Boulder Clay of the # North Sea ice. Glacial eravels cap 
the higher ground of the Triassic sandstones. Church Hole, one of 
the Magnesian Limestone caves of Creswell Crags, yielded remains of 
cave-lion, bear, mammoth, rhinoceros, &c. Older river-gravels flank 
the pasture land of the Trent alluvium. 

Climate and Agriculture.— As the higher regions of Derbyshire and 
Yorkshire attract the rain clouds, the climate of Nottinghamshire 
is above the average in dryness; thus, the mean annual rainfall at 
Bawtry is 23-57 * n - and at Nottingham 26-83 m ' ^ n tms account 
crops ripen nearly as early as in the S. counties. The soil of about 
one-half the county is gravel and sand, including Sherwood Forest, 
where it inclines to sterility, and the valley of the Trent, where there 
is a rich vegetable mould on a stratum of sand or gravel. The land 
along the banks of the Trent is equally suitable for crops and pasture. 
The farms generally are of moderate size, the great majority being 
under 300 acres. Most of the immediate occupants are tenants-at- 
will. Roughly four-fifths of the total area is under cultivation. 
Apples and pears are grown in considerable quantities, but there are 
not many orchards of large size. Shorthorns are the favourite breed 
of cattle, and dairy farming is considerably prosecuted. The old 
forest breed of sheep is almost extinct, Leicester s and various crosses 
being common. 

Industries. — Coal is mined chiefly on the S.W. border of the county 
near Nottingham and near Mansfield ; there are also mines near 
Worksop. Clay, sandstone and limestone are also extensively raised. 
The lace and hosiery industries are of old establishment in the county, 
Nottingham being the principal centre. There are silk, worsted and 
cotton mills. A large number of hands are employed in machinery 
works, and the cycle and motor manufacture of Beeston is important. 
The manufacture of tobacco and cigars is considerable at Nottingham 
and Hucknall Torkard. 

Communications. — The main line of the Midland railway touches 
the S.W. border of the county, with an alternative route through 
Nottingham, and branches thence N. through Hucknall and Mansfield 
to Worksop, to Newark and Lincoln, from Mansfield to Southwell 
and Newark, &c. The main line of the Great Central railway serves 
Nottingham and Hucknall. That of the Great Northern railway 
serves Newark and Retford, with a branch to Nottingham and local 
lines in that vicinity. A branch of the Great Central railway, 
formerly (till 1908) the main line of the Lancashire, Derbyshire and 
East Coast railway, enters the county on the W. from Chesterfield, 
and crosses the Dukeries by OUerton to Dukeries Junction (G.N.R.) 
and Lincoln. The Sheffield-Grimsby line of the Great Central crosses 
the N. of the county by Worksop and Retford. The Trent is navig- 
able throughout the county, and the Idle between Bawtry and the 
Trent. The principal canals centre upon Nottingham. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the ancient 
county is 539,756 acres, with a population in 1901 of 514,578. 
The area of the administrative county is 540,123. The county 
contains the city and county and municipal borough of Notting- 
ham (pop. 239,743), and the municipal boroughs of Retford or 
East Retford (12,340), Mansfield (21,445) and Newark (14,992). 
The urban districts are Arnold (8757), Beeston (8960), Carlton 
(10,041), Eastwood (4815), Hucknall Torkard (15,250), Hucknall 
under Huthwaite (4076), Kirkby in Ashfield (10,318), Mansfield 
Woodhouse (4877), Sutton in Ashfield (14,862), Warsop (2132), 
West Bridgford (7018), Worksop (16,112). For parliamentary 
purposes the ancient county is divided into four divisions 
(Bassetlaw, Newark, Rushcliffe and Mansfield), each returning 
one member; and the parliamentary borough of Nottingham 
returns one member for each of its three divisions. There are 
one court of quarter sessions and seven petty sessional divisions. 
The boroughs of Newark and Nottingham have separate com- 
missions of the peace, also separate courts of quarter sessions; 
that of East Retford has a separate commission of the peace. 
The total number of civil parishes is 266. The ancient county 
contains 231 ecclesiastical parishes and districts, wholly or in 
part; it is situated principally in the diocese of Southwell and 
partly in the diocese of York. 

History. — The earliest Teutonic settlers in the district which 
is now Nottinghamshire were an Anglian tribe who, not later 
than the 5th century, advanced from Lincolnshire along the 
Fosseway, and, pushing their way up the Trent valley, settled 
in the fertile districts of the S. and E., the whole W. region from 
Nottingham to within a short distance of Southwell being then 
occupied by the vast forest of Sherwood. At the end of the 6th 
century Nottinghamshire already existed as organized territory, 
though its W. limit probably extended no farther than the Saxon 
relics discovered at Oxton and Tuxford. Nottingham after the 
treaty of Wedmore became one of the five Danish boroughs. 
On the break-up of Mercia under Hardicanute, Nottinghamshire 
was included in the earldom of the Middle English, but in 1049 
it again became part of Leofric's earldom of Mercia, and descended 
to Edwin and Morkere. The first mention of the shire of Notting- 
ham occurs in 1016, when it was harried by Canute. The 
boundaries have remained practically unaltered since the time 
of the Domesday Survey, and the eight Domesday wapentakes 
were unchanged in 1610; in 1719 they had been reduced to six, 
their present number, Oswald beck being absorbed in Basset law, 
of which it forms the North Clay division, and " Side " in Thur- 
garton. Nottinghamshire was originally included in the diocese 
and province of York, .and in 1291 formed an archdeaconry 
comprising the deaneries of Nottingham, Newark, Bingham and 
Retford. By act of parliament of 1836 the county was trans- 
ferred to the diocese of Lincoln and province of Canterbury, with 
the additional deanery of Southwell. In 1878 the deaneries of 
Mansfield, South Bingham, West Bingham, Colhngham, Tuxford 
and Worksop were created, and in 1884 most of the county was 
transferred to the newly-created diocese of Southwell, the 
deaneries being unchanged. The deaneries of Bawtry, Bulwell, 
Gedling, East Newark and Norwell were created in 1888. Until 
1568 Nottinghamshire was united with Derbyshire under one 
sheriff, the courts and tourns being held at Nottingham until 
the reign of Henry III., when with the assizes for both counties 
they were removed to Derby. In the time of Edward I. the 
assizes were again held at Nottingham, where they are held at 
the present day. The Peverel Court, founded before 1 113 for the 
recovery of small debts, had jurisdiction over 127 towns in 
Nottinghamshire, and was held at Nottingham until 1321, in 
1330 at Algarthorpe and in 1790 at Lenton, being finally abolished 
in 1849. The most interesting historic figure in the Domesday 
Survey of Nottinghamshire is William Peverel. His fief repre- 
sents the honour of Nottingham, and in 1068 he was appointed 
constable of the castle which William the Conqueror had raised 
at Nottingham. The Cliftons of Clifton and the Byrons of 
Newstead held lands in Nottinghamshire at the time of the 
Survey. Holme Pierrepoint belonged to the Pierrepoints from 
the time of Edward I. ; Shelford was the seat of the Stanhopes, 
and Langer of the Tibetots, afterwards earls of Worcester. 
Archbishop Cranmer was a descendant of the Granmers of 
Aslockton near Bingham. 

The political history of Nottinghamshire centres round the 
town and castle of Nottingham, which was seized by Robert of 
Gloucester on behalf of Maud in 1140; captured by John in 
1 191; surrendered to Henry III. by the rebellious barons in 
1264; formed an important station of Edward III. in the Scottish 
wars; and in 1397 was the scene of a council where three of the 
lords appellant were appealed of treason. In the Wars of the 
Roses the county as a whole favoured the Yorkist cause, Notting- 
ham being one of the most useful stations of Edward IV. In 
the Civil War of the 17th century most of the nobility and 
gentry favoured the Royalist cause, but Nottingham Castle 
was garrisoned for the parliament, and in 1651 was ordered to 
be demolished. 

Among the earliest industries of Nottinghamshire were the 
malting and woollen industries, which flourished in Norman 
times. The latter declined in the 16th century, and was super- 
seded by the hosiery manufacture which sprang up after the 
invention of the stocking-loom in 1589. The earliest evidence 
of the working of the Nottinghamshire coalfield is in 1259, 
when Queen Eleanor was unable to remain in this county on 
account of the smoke of the sea-coal. Collieries are scarcely 
heard of in Nottinghamshire in the 17th century, but in 1620 
the justices of the peace for the shire report that there is no fear 
of scarcity of corn, as the counties which send up the Trent for 
coal bring corn in exchange, and in 1881 thirty-nine collieries 
were at work in the county. Hops were formerly extensively 
grown, and Worksop was famous for its liquorice. Numerous 
cotton-mills were erected in Nottinghamshire in the 18th century, 
and there were silk-mills at Nottingham. The manufacture of 
tambour lace existed in Nottinghamshire in the 18th century, and 
was facilitated in the 19th century by the manufacture of 
machine-made net. From 1295 the county and town of Notting- 
ham 'each returned two members to parliament. In 1572 East 
Retford was represented by two members, and in 1672 Newark- 
upon-Trent also. Under the Reform Act of 1832 the county 
returned four members in two divisions. By the act of 1885 it 
returned four members in four divisions; Newark and East 
Retford were disfranchised, and Nottingham returned three 
members in three divisions. 

Antiquities. — At the dissolution of the monasteries there were 
no fewer than forty religious houses in Nottinghamshire. The 
only important monastic remains, however, are those at New- 
stead, but the building is partly transformed into a mansion 
which was formerly the residence of Lord Byron (see Hucknall 
Torkard). There are also traces of monastic ruins at Beau vale, 
Mattersey, Radford and Thurgarton. The finest parish church 
in the county is that of Newark. The churches of St Mary, 
Nottingham, and of Southwell were collegiate churches; South- 
well, now a cathedral, is a splendid building, principally Norman. 
The churches of Balderton, Bawtry, Hoveringham, Mansfield 
and Worksop are also partly Norman, and those of Coddington, 
Hawton and Upton St Peter near Southwell, Early English. Of 
the old castles, the principal remains are those at Newark, but 
there are several interesting old mansions, as at Kingshaugh, 
Scrooby, Shelford and Southwell. Wollaton Hall, near Notting- 
ham, is a fine old building (c.i 580). The finest residences of more 
modern date are Welbeck and others in the Dukeries (q.v.). 

See Victoria County History, Nottinghamshire; R. Thoroton, The 
Antiquities of Nottinghamshire. (Loud., 1677; republished with 
additions by J. Thoresby, 3 vols., Lond., 1797); Thomas Bailey, 
Annals of Nottinghamshire (4 vols., Lond., 1852-1856); J. P. 
Briscoe, Old Nottinghamshire (1881); J. Ward, Descriptive Catalogue 
of Books relating to Nottinghamshire (Nottingham, 1892). 


NOUMENON (Gr. voovfievov, a thing known, from voeiv), 
a philosophical term put into currency by Kant and not much 
used except in definite reference to his doctrine. In the Kantian 
system the term " noiimena " means things-in-themselves as 
opposed to " phenomena " or things as they appear to us. 
According to Kant the human mind is such that it can never 
penetrate by its speculative powers to things-in-themselves, 
but can only know phenomena. Thus we have the odd position 
that noiimena, or thecontents of the intelligible world, are just 
the things to which thought can never penetrate. The term, 
however, is a relic of an early period of Kant's mental develop- 
ment. In his fully mature or critical position he held that the 
noiimenal world was inaccessible to the speculative reason, and 
yet that we are not altogether excluded from it, since the practical 
reason, i.e. our capacity for acting as moral agents, assures us 
of the existence of a noiimenal world wherein freedom, God and 
immortality have a real place. The relation of noiimena to 
phenomena in the Kantian system is a most difficult one; and, 
in view of the fact that the acutest intellects of Europe have been 
engaged vainly for more than a century in reconciling the various 
passages on the subject, the safest conclusion is that they are 
irreconcilable. The course adopted by Kant's immediate 
successors in German idealism was to reject the whole conception 
of noiimena, for the reason that what is essentially unknowable 
has no existence for our intelligence. Kant, however, protested 
strongly against this development when it was propounded by 
Fichte, and held that he had precluded it by his " refutation 
of idealism": he stood unshakably to the belief in an absolutely 
real world behind phenomena. Kant's position may be illogical 
as he himself stated it; but it is the expression of a sound 
principle: we must connect it with his general tendency to 
recognize the dynamic side of things. He saw, what so many 
of his successors failed to see, that the world as we know it is 
an expression of power; and he could not imagine whence the 
power could come if not from a world beyond phenomena. 
(See Kant; Phenomenon.) (H. St.) 


NOVALICHES, MANUEL PAVIA Y LACY, ist Marquis de 
(1 814-1896), Spanish marshal, was born at Granada on the 
6th of July 1 8 14. He was the son of Colonel Pavia, and after 
a few years at the Jesuit school of Valencia he entered the Royal 
Artillery Academy at Segovia. In 1833 he became a lieutenant 
in the guards of Queen Isabella II., and during the Carlist War 
from 1833 to 1840 he became general of division in the latter 
year at the early age of twenty-six. The Moderate party made 
him war minister in 1847, and sent him to Catalonia, where 
his efforts to put down a Carlist rising were not attended with 
success. He had been made a senator in 1845, and marquis in 
1848. He was sent out to Manila in 1852 as captain-general 
of the Philippine Islands. In April 1854 he crushed with much 
sternness a formidable insurrection and carried out many 
useful reforms. On his return to Spain he married the countess 
of Santa Isabel, and commanded the reserves in the Peninsula 
during the war with Morocco. He refused the war portfolio 
twice offered him by Marshals O'Donnell and Narvaez and 
undertook to form a cabinet of Moderates in 1864 that lived 
but a few days. He volunteered to crush the insurrection in 
Madrid on the 22nd of June 1866, and when the revolution broke 
out in September 1868 accepted the command of Queen Isabella's 
troops. He was defeated by Marshal Serrano at the bridge of 
Alcolea on the 28th of September 1868, and was so badly wounded 
in the face that he was disfigured for life He kept apart during 
the revolution and went to meet King Alfonso when he landed 
at Valencia in January 1875. The Restoration made the marquis 
de Novaliehes a senator, and the new king gave him the Golden 
Fleece. He died in Madrid on the 22nd of October 1896. 


NOVALIS, the pseudonym of Friedrich Leopold, Freiherr 
von Hardenberg (1772-1801), German poet and novelist. The 
name was taken, according to family records, from an ancestral 
estate. He was born on the 2nd of May 1772 on his father's 
estate at Oberwiederstedt in Prussian Saxony. His parents were 
members of the Moravian (Hermkuter) sect, and the strict religious 
training of his youth is largely reflected in his literary works. 
From the gymnasium of Eisleben he passed, in 1790, as a student 
of philosophy, to the university of Jena, where he was befriended 
by Schiller. He next studied law at Leipzig, when he formed 
a friendship with Friedrich Schlegel, and finally at Wittenberg, 
where, in 1794, he took his degree. His father's cousin, the 
Prussian minister Hardenberg, now offered him a government 
post at Berlin; but the father feared the influence upon his son 
of the loose-living statesman, and sent him to learn the practical 
duties of his profession under the Krcisamtmann (district 
administrator) of Tennstedt near Langensalza. In the following 
year he was appointed auditor to the government saltworks 
in Weissenfels, of which his father was director. His grief at 
the death in 1797 of Sophie von Kiihn, to whom he had become 
betrothed in Tennstedt, found expression in the beautiful 
Hymnen an die Nacht (first published in the Athenaum> 1800). 
A few months later he entered the Mining Academy of Freiberg 
in Saxony to study geology under Professor Abraham Gottlob 
Werner (1750-1817), whom in the fragment Die Lehrlinge zu 
Sais he immortalized as the " Meister." Here he again became 
engaged to be married, and the next two years were fruitful in 
poetical productions. In the autumn of 1799 he read at Jena 
to the admiring circle of young romantic poets his Geistliche 
Lieder. Several of these, such as " Wenn alle untreu werden," 
" Wenn ich ihn nur habe," " Unter tausend frohen Stunden," 
still retain, as church hymns, great popularity. In 1800 he was 
appointed Amtskauptmann (local magistrate) in Thuringia, and 
was preparing to marry and settle, when pulmonary consumption 
rapidly set in, of which he died at Weissenfels on the 25th of 
March 1801. 

His works were issued in two volumes by his friends Ludwig 
Tieck and Friedrich Schlegel (2 vols. 1802; a third volume was 
added in 1846). They are for the most part fragments, of which 
Heinrich von Ofterdingen, an unfinished romance, is the chief. 
It was undertaken at the instance of Tieck, and reflects the 
ideas and tendencies of the older Romantic School, of which 
Hardenberg was a leading member. Heinrich von Ofterdingen's 
search for the mysterious " blue flower " is an allegory of the 
poet's life set in a romantic medieval world. Novalis, however, 
did not succeed in blending his mystic and philosophical concep- 
tions into a harmonious whole. The " fragments " contain 
idealistic though paradoxical views on philosophy, art, natural 
science, mathematics, &c. 

There are editions ot his collected works by C. Meisner and B. Wille 
(1898), by E. Heilborn (3 vols., 1901), and by J. Minor (3 vols., 
1907). Heinrich von Ojterdingen was published separately by J. 
Schmidt in 1876. Novalis's Correspondence was edited by J. M. 
Raich in 1880. See R. Haym, Die romantische Schule (Berlin, 1870); 
A. Schubart, Novalis* Leben, Dichten und Denken (1887); C. Busse, 
Novalis' Lyrik (1898); J. Bing, Friedrich von Hardenberg (Hamburg, 
1899), E. Heilborn, Friedrich von Hardenberg (Berlin, 1901). Carlyle s 
fine essay on Novalis (1829) is well known. 


NOVARA, a town and episcopal see, of Piedmont, Italy, 
capital of the province of No vara, 31 m. by rail W. of Milan, 
538 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1006) 37,962 (town), 48,694 
(commune). Railways diverge hence to Varallo Sesia, Orta, 
Arona (for Domodossola), Busto Arsizio, Milan, Vigevano and 
Vercelli. Previous to 1839 No vara was still surrounded by its 
old Spanish ramparts, but it is now an open, modern-looking 
town. Part of the old citadel is used as a prison. The cathedral 
dates from the 4th century (?), but (with the exception of the 
octagonal dome-roofed baptistery belonging to the first part 
of the 10th century, and separated from the west end by an 
atrium) was rebuilt between i860 and 1870 after designs by 
Antonelli; the church of S Gaudenzio, dedicated to Bishop 
Gaudentius (d. 417), who is buried under the high altar, rebuilt 
by Pellegrino Tibaldi about 1570, has a baroque campanile and 
a dome 396 ft. high, the latter added by Antonelli in 1875-1878; 
and San Pietro del Rosario is the church in which the papal 
anathema was pronounced against the followers of Fra Dolcino. 
The two first contain pictures by Gaudenzio Ferrari. The 
city also contains handsome market-buildings erected in 181 7- 
1842, a large hospital dating from the 9th century and a court- 
house constructed in 1346. The town has also a museum of 
Roman antiquities. The principal industry is the carding and 
spinning of silk; there are also iron- works and foundries, cotton 
mills, rice-husking mills, organ factories, dye-works and printing 
works. 

No vara, the ancient Novaria, according to Pliny a place of 
Celtic origin, according to Cato (but wrongly) of Ligurian origin, 
was a municipal city, and lay on the road between Vercellae 
and Mediolanum. Its rectangular plan may well be a survival 
of Roman days. Dismantled in 386 by Maximus for siding with 
his rival Valentinian, it was restored by Theodosius; but it 
was afterwards ravaged by Radagaisus (405) and Attila (452). 
A dukedom of Novara was constituted by the Lombards, a 
countship by Charlemagne. In mo the city was taken and 
burned by the emperor Henry V. Before the close of the 12th 
century it accepted the protection of Milan, and thus passed into 
the hands, first, of the Visconti, and, secondly, of the Sforzas. In 
1706 the city, which had long before, been ceded by Maria 
Visconti to Amadeus VIII. of Savoy, was occupied by the Savoy 
troops. At the peace of Utrecht it passed to the house of Austria 
with the duchy of Milan; but, having been occupied by Charles 
Emmanuel in 1734, it was granted to him in the following year. 
Under the French it was the chief town of the department of 
Agogna. Restored to Savoy in 1814, it was in 1821 the scene 
of the defeat of the Piedmontese by the Austrians, and in 1849 
of the more disastrous battle which led to the abdication of 

Charles Albert and an Austrian occupation of the city. The 
painter Gaudenzio Ferrari was a native of Novara; and so was 
Peter Lombard. (T. As.) 


NOVA SCOTIA, a province of the Dominion of Canada, lying 
between 43 25' and 47 N. and 59 40' and 66° 25' W., and 
composed of the peninsula proper and the adjoining island of 
Cape Breton (q.v.), which is separated from the mainland by 
the Strait of Canso. The extreme length from S.W. to N.E. is 
374 m. (N.S. 268, C.B. 308); breadth 60 to 100 m,; area 21,428 
sq. m. The isthmus of Chignecto, 115 m. wide, connects it with 
the province of New Brunswick. 

Physical Features. — Nova Scotia is intersected by chains of 
hills. The Cobequid Mountains, stretching from E. to W. and 
terminating in Cape Chignecto, form the chief ridge. Several 
of the elevations are as high as 11 00 ft., and are cultivable 
almost to their summits. Lying on each side of this range are 
two extensive tracts of arable land. A ridge of precipices runs 
for 130 m. along the Bay of Fundy from* Brier Island at the 
farthest extremity of Digby Neck and culminates in Capes 
Split and Blomidon. Here and there rocks, from 200 to 600 ft. 
in height and covered with stunted firs, overhang the coasts. 
Beyond them lies the garden of Nova Scotia, the valley of the 
Annapolis. The Atlantic coast from Cape Canso to Cape Sable 
is high and bold, containing many excellent harbours, of which 
Halifax (Chebucto Bay) is the chief. The N. shore is, as a rule, 
low, with hills Some distance from the coast. Of its harbours 
the most important is Pictou. Of the inlets the most remarkable 
is Minas Basin, the eastern arm of the Bay of Fundy; it pene- 
trates some 60 m. inland, and terminates in Cobequid Bay, 
where the tides rise sometimes as high as 53 ft., while on the 
opposite coast, in Halifax Harbour, the spring tides scarcely 
exceed 7 or 8 ft. The height of the Fundy tides has, however, 
been often exaggerated, the average being 42*3 ft. Many islands 
occur along the coast, particularly on the S.E.; of these the 
most celebrated is Sable Island (q.v.). The rivers are, with few 
exceptions, navigable for coasting vessels for from 2 to 20 m. 
The principal are the Annapolis, Avon, Shubenacadie, the East, 
Middle and West rivers of Pictou, the Musquodoboit and the 
Lahave. The largest of the fresh-water lakes is Lake Rossignol, 
situated in Queen's county, and more than 20 m. long. Ship 
Harbour Lake, 15 m. in length, and Grand Lake are in Halifax 
county. 

^ Geology. — The Lower Cambrian formation forms an almost con- 
tinuous belt along the Atlantic coast, varying in width from 10 to 
75 m. and covering an area estimated at 8500 sg. m. 1 1 is interrupted 
by large masses of intrusive granite, extending from the extreme 
S.W. of the province as far as Halifax, and cropping out in detached 
areas as far as Cape Canso. This part of the province is rugged and 
sterile, and abounds in small lakes and peat bogs. Along the N.E. 
coast extends a Carboniferous area, including two large and pro- 
ductive coal-fields in Cumberland and Pictou counties, and continued 
in the coal-fields of Cape Breton. On the S. coast of the Bay of Fundy, 
and at Minas Basin and Channel, the Triassic Red Sandstone forma- 
tion predominates, more or less protected by a narrow rim of trap 
rock, culminating at its E. end in the basaltic promontory of 
Blomidon (Blow-me-down). The Cobequid Mountains are a mass of 
slates, quartzitcs and intrusive rocks (apparently Siluro-Cambrian). 
At the Joggins, near Cape Chignecto, occurs a splendid exposure, rich 
in curious minerals and fossils, and very celebrated among geologists. 

Climate; Flora and Fauna. — The climate of Nova Scotia is more 
temperate than that of New Brunswick, and more equable than that 
of the inland provinces, though not so dry. Spring and winter begin 
about a fortnight later than in Ontario. Dense fogs often drift in 
from the Atlantic, but are not considered unhealthy. 

Most of the principal birds of North America are to be found, 
and the game of the country includes moose, caribou, duck, teal, 
geese, woodcock, partridge, snipe, plover, &c. The game laws are 
strict and well enforced. The chief wild animals are bears, foxes 
and wild-cats. Wolves, once numerous, are now extinct. The 
natural flora does not differ greatly from that of the New England 
states. The sweet-smelling may-flower, or trailing arbutus (Epigaea 
repens), grows extensively, and has long been the provincial emblem. 

Population. — The population increases slowly, having risen 
only from 440,572 in 1881 to 459,574 in 1901, an average of 21-8 
to the square mile (total area, 21,428 sq.m.). The rural population 
is grouped along the river valleys, and the natural increase is 
normal, but there is a large emigration to the manufacturing 
cities of the E. states and to the Canadian N.W. The great mass 
of the people are of British descent, but in parts of Cape Breton 
are found descendants of the early French settlers; in Lunenburg 
and the S.E. is a large German colony; near Halifax are a number 
of negroes from the West Indies, and scattered through the 
province are about 2000 Micmac Indians, who now confine 
themselves chiefly to the making of bows and arrows, baskets 
and trinkets; though they carry on a certain amount of mixed 
farming. Few are of absolutely pure Indian blood. The settlers 
of English and Scotch descent are about equal in numhers, but 
the latter have been more prominent in the development of the 
province. The Irish are found chiefly in Halifax and in the 
mining towns of Cape Breton. Roman Catholics, Presbyterians 
and Baptists predominate, though the Church of England is 
strong in Halifax, and still retains a certain social prestige. 

Administration. — The executive authority is in the hands of 
a lieutenant-governor appointed for five years by the federal 
government, and of a council appointed from and responsible to 
the local legislature. This consists of a lower house of assembly, 
and of a legislative council of twenty life members, which the 
assemhly has frequently, but in vain, endeavoured to abolish. 
The municipal system was introduced subsequent to federation, 
and is modelled on that of Ontario. 

The revenue is chiefly made up of the Dominion subsidy 
(see Ontario), and of royalties on mining concessions, chiefly 
those on coal. Owing to the great increase of mining in Cape 
Breton, its payments towards the revenue are larger in pro- 
portion than those of the mainland. 

Education. — Primary education is free and compulsory; secondary 
education is also free but optional. In each county one high school is 
raised to the rank of an academy, free to all qualified students in the 
county, and receives an additional grant. Roman Catholics have 
not won the right of separate schools, as in Ontario, but in Halifax 
and other districts where that church is strong, a compromise has been 
arranged. Thus the two Roman Catholic colleges, St Francis Xavier 
(English) at Antigonish, and St Anne (French) at Church Point 
(Digby county), and most of the convents are in affiliation with the 
public school system. There are also many private schools, chiefly 
for girls, and under denominational control. But while primary and 
secondary education is widespread and of good quality, higher 
education has suffered from denominational bickerings, and the 
universities are still too many and too small. They are: King's 
College, Windsor (Anglican), founded in 1790; Acadia University, 
Wolfville (Baptist, 1839); St Francis Xavier, Antigonish (Roman 
Catholic, 1866); and Dalhousie University, Halifax (Undenomina- 
tional), established by charter in 1818, reorganized in 1863, the 
largest and the most efficient, possessing faculties of arts, science, 
medicine and law. The province supports a normal school and 
schools of agriculture and of horticulture at Truro, and has voted 
Sioo.ooo for a College of Technology at Halifax. 

Commerce and Manufactures. — Nova Scotia is naturally a sea-going 
province, and till about 1881 had the largest tonnage, in proportion 
to population, in the world. Since then, her shipping has greatly 
diminished, though Halifax is still one of the chief winter ports of 
the Dominion, and Sydney is also a favourite port of call for steamers 
in need of " bunker ' coal. The water-power provided by the rivers 
supports many manufactures. Several sugar-refineries exist, and a 
large trade is carried on with Bermuda and the West India islands. ^ 

Fisheries. — The fisheries of Nova Scotia are the most important in 
Canada, and the value of their products ($7,841,602 in 1904) is about 
one-third that of the whole Dominion. Lobsters, cod and mackerel 
constitute the bulk of the catch. Many boats are also fitted out in 
Lunenburg, Digby, Yarmouth and other ports for the Grand Banks of 
Newfoundland. A bounty is paid by the Dominion government, and 
attempts are being made to introduce more scientific methods among 
the fishermen. The vessels are manned by over 25,000 men, and 
many more are employed in the lobster canneries and kindred 
industries. Trout and salmon abound in the inland lakes and 
streams. 

Lumber. — Lumbering was long the chief industry of the province, 
and is still very important, though the percentage of forest left uncut 
is only about 30%. The network of small lakes and rivers enables 
the logs to be brought to the mills with great ease, and little rough 
timber is now exported. The chief export is that of spruce deals, 
almost entirely from Halifax. The manufacture of wood-pulp for 
paper is also carried on. 

Minerals. — Bituminous coal is mined in various parts of Cape 
Breton (q.v.) and in the counties of Cumberland and Pictou. The 
seams dip at a low angle, and are of great thickness, especially in 
Pictou county. The total product exceeds 5,000,000 tons, annually, 
more than two-thirds that of the whole Dominion. Of this over half 
is mined in the neighbourhood of Sydney, Cape Breton. Other 

	66» 
	NOVA SCOTIA 
	and 
	PRINCE EDWARD I. 
	Longitude West 6/of Greenwich 
	D 
	6o° 

important centres are Springhill, Acadia Mines, Stellarton and Glace 
Bay (C.B.). It is shipped as far west as Montreal, and to tbe New 
England states. Iron is largely produced, chiefly in the vicinity of 
the Cumberland and Pictou coal-fields. The deposits include magne- 
tite, red haematite, specular, limonite and carbonate ores. Blast 
furnaces are in operation, especially at New Glasgow, Sydney and 
North Sydney, though most of the ore used at Sydney is imported 
from Newfoundland. The quarries of easily worked limestone, the 
product of which is used as a " flux " in the blast furnaces, add to 
the value of the iron deposits. Gold occurs in workable quantities 
in the quartz all along the Atlantic^ coast, and several small but 
successful mining enterprises are in operation, yielding ^ about 
$500,000 annually. Large deposits of gypsum occur, especially at 
Windsor in Hants county. Manganese and copper are also worked 
on a small scale. 

Agriculture, — The attention paid to lumbering, fishing and shipping, 
and the subsequent emigration westwards have lessened the impor- 
tance of this industry. Mixed farming is however largely carried on, 
and of late years dairy farming has been greatly extended and im- 
proved, and much butter and cheese is exported to England. Both 
the Dominion and the provincial governments have endeavoured to 
introduce scientific methods. Nova Scotia ranks second to Ontario 
in its production of apples and peaches. The centre of this industry 
is the valley of the Annapolis, where, it is said, one " may ride for 
fifty miles under apple-blossoms." At the head of the Bay of Fundy 
and on Minas Basin the Iow-lyin£ meadows produce splendid crops 
of hay. Owing to high Fundy tides, the air in the neighbourhood 
is constantly in motion, the result being a cool temperature, even in 
the height of summer, which is well fitted for stock-raising. 

Roads and Railroads. — Road-making machines are employed for 
the improvement of the ordinary highways, and steel bridges are 
replacing the. wooden structures; but the roads in the country 
districts still leave much to be desired. The Intercolonial railway, 
owned and worked by the Dominion government, is the chief means 
of communication with the other provinces, and for the carriage of 
local traffic. Besides the main line from Halifax to Amherst, a 
branch runs from Truro to Sydney, and another from Oxford Junction 
to Pictou and Stellarton. The Canadian Pacific railway has running 
rights over it from St John (N.B.) to Halifax; on its completion, 
similar rigjits will be granted from Moncton to Halifax to the Grand 
Trunk Pacific. The Dominion Atlantic railway extends from 
Windsor Junction, near Halifax, to Yarmouth; the Nova Scotia 
Central railway from Lunenburg to Middleton on the Dominion 
Atlantic railway. A line along the Atlantic coast connects Halifax 
and Yarmouth, whence a daily line of steamers sails for Boston. 
Other lines connect Halifax with a number of the S.W. coast and 
inland towns, and a line has been projected from New Glasgow to 
Guysborough and the coast. Several smaller lines are owned l>y the 
various coal-mining companies. Telegraph and telephone lines 
extend all over the province, and there are two cable stations — one 
at Canso and the other at Sydney. The Marconi Company has 
stations for wireless telegraphy at Halifax, Cape Sable, Sable Island 
and Glace Bay. 

History. — Nova Scotia may well have been the Markland of 
early Norse and Icelandic voyages, and Cape Breton was visited 
by the Cabots in 1407-1408, but not till 1604 was any attempt 
at permanent colonization made by Europeans. In that year 
an expedition was headed by a Frenchman, Pierre de Guast, 
Sieur de Monts (1560-c. 1630), who had received from Henry IV. 
full powers to explore and take possession of all lands in North 
America lying between the 40th and 46th parallels of north 
latitude. De Monts and his friend de Poutrincourt (d. 161 5), 
endeavoured to form settlements at Port Royal (now Annapolis), 
St Croix (in New Brunswick) and elsewhere, but quarrels broke 
out with the Jesuits, and in 1613 the English colonists of Virginia 
made a descent upon them, claimed the territory in right of the 
discovery by the Cabots, and expelled the greater part of the 
inhabitants. In 162 1 Sir William Alexander obtained from 
James I. a grant of the whole peninsula, which was named in 
the patent, Nova Scotia, instead of Acadia, the old name given 
to the colony by the French. During the reign of Charles I. the 
stfll existing order of Baronets of Nova Scotia was instituted, 
and their patents ratified in parliament. The treaty of St 
Germain-en-Laye (1632) confirmed France in the possession of 
Acadia, Cape Breton and New France; but fierce feuds broke 
out among the French settlers, and in 1654 a force sent out by 
Cromwell took possession of the country, but by the treaty of 
Breda (1667) it was restored to France by Charles II. Continual 
fighting went on between the French and the British colonists 
of New England, the Indians taking part, usually on the side of 
the French; in 1710 the province was finally captured by Great 
Britain and ceded to her in 17 13 by the treaty of Utrecht, under 
the name of " Acadia or Nova Scotia/' the French remaining 
masters of Cape Breton. Perpetual quarrels went on concerning 
the boundaries of the district ceded; the English claim comprised 
the present Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, most of New 
Brunswick and the Gaspe peninsula, while the French restricted 
it to the S. half of what is now Nova Scotia. In 1749 Halifax 
was founded as a counterpoise to Louisbourg in Cape Breton, 
and over 4000 colonists sent out, but the French opposed the new 
settlers. In 1755 about 6000 French were suddenly seized by 
Governor Charles Laurence (d. 1760) and hurried into exile. 
After undergoing many sufferings, some eventually found their 
way back, while others settled in Cape Breton, or in distant 
Louisiana. By the treaty of Paris in 1763, France resigned all 
claim to the country. In 1769 Prince Edward Island (formerly 
Isle St Jean) was made a separate government. Meanwhile, 
immigration from the New England colonies had filled the fertile 
meadows left vacant by the Acadians. A later influx of American 
Loyalists led in 1784 to the erection of New Brunswick into a 
separate colony. In the same year, Cape Breton was also 
separated from Nova Scotia but reunited in 1820. 

During the wars of the American and French revolutions 
Halifax grew apace. Hither, in June 1813, came the " Shannon " 
with her prize the " Chesapeake," captured off Boston harbour. 
Meanwhile, between 1784 and 1828, a large Scottish emigration, 
chiefly from the Highlands, had settled in the counties around 
Pictou, and the lumbering industry rose to great proportions. 
Agriculture was for some time neglected, but in 1818 the letters 
of " Agricola " (John Young, 1773-1837) gave it an impetus. 
Representative institutions had been granted as early as 1758, 
but power long rested mainly in the hands of a Council of Twelve, 
comprising the chief justice, the Anglican bishop and other high 
officials. In 1848, after a long struggle, responsible government 
was won by the legislative assembly, led by Joseph Howe. 

In these political struggles, education was often the battle- 
ground, the fight ending in 1864 in the establishment of free 
primary and secondary schools by Dr (afterwards Sir Charles) 
Tupper, and the re-organization on an undenominational basis 
of Dalhousie University (see Halifax). In 1867 the province 
entered the new Dominion of Canada. For some years after- 
wards an agitation in favour of repeal was maintained, but 
gradually died away. Since then its history is a record of 
uneventful progress. 

Bibliography. — For history, seeDuncan Campbell, Nova Scotia, 
(1873); T. C. Haliburton (" Sam Slick "), Historical and Statistical 
Account of Nova Scotia (1829); Beamish Murdoch, History of Nova 
Wolfe, on the other. For general information, see S. E. Dawson, 
North America (1897); Sir Wm. Dawson, Acadian Geology (4th ed., 
1 891) ; J. C. Hopkins, Canada: an Encyclopaedia (6 vols., 1 898-1 899). 


NOVATIANUS, Roman presbyter, and one of the earliest 
antipopes, founder of the sect of the Novatiani or Novatians, 
was born about the beginning of the 3rd century. On . the 
authority of Philostorgius (H.E. viii. 15) he has been called a 
native of Phrygia, but perhaps the historian merely intended 
to indicate the persistence of Novatianism in Phrygia at the 
time when he wrote. Little is known of his life, and that only 
from his opponents. His conversion is said to have taken place 
after an intense mental struggle; he was baptized by sprinkling, 
and without episcopal confirmation, when in hourly expectation 
of death; and on his recovery his Christianity retained all the 
gloomy character of its earliest stages. He was ordained at Rome 
( by Fabian, or perhaps by an earlier bishop; and during the 
Decian persecution he maintained the view which excluded from 
ecclesiastical communion all those (lapsi) who after baptism 
had sacrificed to idols — a view which had frequently found 
expression, and had caused the schism of Hippolytus. Bishop 
Fabian suffered martyrdom in January 250, and, when Cornelius 
was elected his successor in March or April 251, Novatian 
objected on account of his known laxity on the above-mentioned 
point of discipline, and allowed himself to be consecrated bishop 
by the minority who shared his views. He and his followers 
were excommunicated by the synod held at Rome in October 
of the same year. He is said by Socrates (H.E. iv. 28) to have 
suffered martyrdom under Valerian. After his death the 
Novatians spread rapidly over the empire; they called them- 
selves nadapoL, or Puritans, and rebaptized their converts from 
the Catholic view. The eighth canon of the council of Nice 
provides in a liberal spirit for the readmission of the clergy of 
the Kadapol to the Catholic Church, and the sect finally dis- 
appeared some two centuries after its origin. , Novatian has 
sometimes been confounded with his contemporary Novatus, 
a Carthaginian presbyter, who held similar views. 
m Novatian was the first Roman Christian who wrote to any con- 
siderable extent in Latin. Of his numerous writings three are 
extant: (1) a letter written in the name of the Roman clergy to 
Cyprian in 250; (2) a treatise in thirty-one chapters, De trinitate; 
(3) a letter written at the request of the Roman laity, De cibis 
judaicis. They are well-arranged compositions, written in an 
elegant and vigorous style. The best editions are by Welchman 
(Oxford, 1724) and by Jackson (London, 1728); they are translated 
in vol. ii. of Cyprian's works in the Ante-Nicene Theol. Libr. (Edin- 
burgh, 1869). The Novatian controversy can be advantageously 
studied in the Epistles of Cyprian. 


NOVATION, a legal term derived from the Roman law, in 
which novatio was of three kinds — substitution of a new 
debtor (expropiissio or delegalio), of a new creditor (cessio 
nominum vel aclionum), or of a new contract. In English law 
the term (though it occurs as early as Bracton) is scarcely 
naturalized, the substitution of a new debtor or creditor being 
generally called an assignment, and of a new contract a merger. 
It is doubtful, however, whether merger applies except where 
the substituted contract is one of a higher nature, as where a 
contract under seal supersedes a simple contract. Where one 
contract is replaced by another, it is of course necessary that the 
new contract should be a valid contract, founded upon sufficient 
consideration (sec Contract). The extinction of the previous 
contract is sufficient consideration. The question whether there 
is a novation most frequently arises in the course of dealing 
between a customer and a new partnership, and on the assignment 
of the business of a life assurance company with reference to 
the assent of the policyholders to the transfer of their policies. 
The points on which novation turns are whether the new firm 
or company has 'assumed the liability of the old, and whether 
the creditor has consented to accept the liability of the new 
debtors and discharge the old. The question is one of fact in 
each case. See especially the Life Assurance Companies Act 1872, 
s. 7, where the word " novations " occurs in the marginal note to 
the section, and so has quasi-statutory sanction. Scots Jaw seems 
to be more stringent than English law in the application of the 
doctrine of novation, and to need stronger evidence of the 
creditor's consent to the transfer of liability. In American law, 
as in English, the term is something of a novelty, except in 
Louisiana, where much of the civil law is retained. 


NOVAYA ZEMLYA (Nova Zetnbla, " new land "), an Arctic 
land off the coast of European Russia, to which it belongs, 
consisting of two large islands separated by a narrow winding 
channel, the Matochkin Shar. It lies between 70 31' and 
7 7 6' N. , and between 5 1 ° 3 5' and 69 2' E. It forms an elongated 
crescent, being nearly 600 m. long with a width of 30 to 90 m., 
and an area of about 36,000 sq. m. It separates the Barents 
Sea on the W. from the Kara Sea on the E. With Vaygach 
Island, between it and the mainland, Novaya Zemlya forms a 
continuation of the Pae-Khoy hills. Vaygach is separated from 
it by the Kara Strait, 30 m. wide, and from the continent by 
the Yugor or Ugrian Strait, only 7 m. across. On the E. coast 
of Novaya Zemlya, especially between the Matochkin Shar 
and 75 N., there are a number of fjord-b'ke inlets — such as 
Chekina, Rasmyslov and Medvizhiy bays. The greater part 
of the W. coast is fretted into bays and promontories, and a 
large number of islets lie off it. At the S. extremity there are 
a number of fjords and the wide bay of Sakhanikha. Then 
farther N. is tbt Xostin Shar, a strait separating Mezhdu- 
sharskiy Island from the coast, and having at its N. entrance 
South Goose Cape, which forms the S. extremity of Goose 
LaDd (Gusinaya Zemlya) in 72 N. Next follows Moller Bay, 
between Goose Land and Cape Britvin, with several minor bays 
affording anchorages. On the W. coast of the N. island are 
Krestovaya, Mashigin and Nordenskjold bays, and to the N. 
are several groups of islands — Gorbovyi, Pankratiev, the Gulf 
Stream Islands and the Orange Islands. Off the E. coast that 
called Pakhtusov (actually divided by a strait into two) may 
be mentioned. Little is known of the interior of Novaya Zemlya. 
It is mountainous throughout. Transverse chains are thrown 
off from the main chain, and are separated by deep narrow valleys, 
some of which are watered by streams of considerable size, which, 
at the spring thaw, bring down a remarkable bulk of detritus. 
The general slope of the land is steeper on the E. than on the 
W., and at the N. and S. extremities there is a descent to a 
comparatively low plateau. In the S. this plateau is broken by 
several parallel ridges, with level valleys between them, dotted 
with numerous small lakes. On either side of the Matochkin 
Shar the hills reach 4000 ft. and upwards. The more elevated 
region is covered with snow-fields which feed glaciers in some 
cases, while the N. seems to be covered with a great ice-sheet. 

Geology. — The geological structure of the central region is of the 
most varied description. The primary rocks which appear at 
Mitushev Kamen are overlaid with thick beds of quartzites and clay- 
slates containing sulphide of iron, with subordinate layers of talc or 
mica slate, and thinner beds of fossiliferous limestone, Silurian or 
Devonian. More recent clay-slates and marls belonging to the middle 
Jurassic occur in the western coast-region about Matochkin Shar. 
About 74° N. the crags of the E. coast are composed 01* grey sand- 
stone, wnile in 76 Barents's Islands, and possibly a much greater 
part of the N.. coast, show Carboniferous strata. Traces of Eocene 
deposits have not been discovered on Novaya Zemlya. During the 
Glacial period its glaciers were much larger than at present, whilst 
during a later portion of the Quaternary period (to judge by the 
marine fossils found as high as 300 ft. above the sea) Novaya Zemlya, 
like the whole of the arctic coast of Russia, *was submerged for 
several hundred feet. At present it appears to partake of the move- 
ment of upheaval common to the whole of N. Russia. 

Climate. — Novaya Zemlya is colder than Spitsbergen (which lies 
more to the N.) as in some degree it shares in the continental con- 
ditions of northern Russia and Siberia. The middle and northern 
parts of the W. coast are not so cold as the E. On the W. coast 
the temperature appears to decrease S. of the Matochkin Shar, being 
reduced by a cold current from the Kara Sea through Kara Strait. 
On the other hand, the climate of the northern part of the W. coast 
is affected by a relatively warm drift from the \V. Under this 
influence there are years when the islands can be circumnavigated 
without difficulty. In the Matochkin Shar region the snow-line is 
estimated at about 1 800 to 2000 ft. Glaciers are rare S. of 72 ° N. 

Flora and Fauna. — Grass does not grow to any extent except in 
Goose Land. Elsewhere even the leaved lichens are precarious, 
though the leather lichens flourish. Of Phanerogams, only the 
Dryas octopetala covers small areas of the debris, interspersed with 
isolated Cochlearia, &c, and, where a layer of thinner clay has been 
deposited in sheltered places, the surface is covered with saxifrages, 
&c. ; and a carpet of mosses allows the arctic willow (Salix polaris) 
to develop. Where a thin sheet of humus, fertilized by lemmings, 
has accumulated, a few flowering plants appear, but even so their 
brilliant flowers spring direct from the soil, concealing the developed 
leaflets, while their horizontally spread roots grow out of proportion ; 
only the Salix lanata rises to 7 or 8 in., sending out roots 1 in. 
thick and 10 to 12 ft. long. This applies only to the better-known 
neighbourhoods of Matochkin Shar and Kostin Shar; N ; of 74 N. 
very few species have been found. The phanerogamic flora _ of 
Novaya Zemlya and Vaygach numbers about two hundred species. 
As to the genetic connexions of the Novaya Zemlya flora, it appears, 
according to M. Kjellmann's researches, to belong to the Asiatic 
rather than to the European arctic region. 

The interior of Novaya Zemlya shows hardly a trace of animal life, 
save here and there a vagrant bird, a few lemmings, an ice^fox, a 
brown or white bear, and at times immigrant reindeer. Even insects 
are few. The sea-coast, however, is occupied by countless birds, 
which come from the S. for the breeding season, and at certain parts 
of the sea-coast the rocks are covered with millions of guillemots, 
while great flocks of ducks of various sorts, geese and swans swarm 
every summer on the valleys and lakes of the south. _ Whales, 
walruses, various seals and dolphins are frequently met with. Only 
two species of fish are of any importance — the goltzy (Salmo alpinus) 
in the western rivers, and the omul (Salmo omul) in the eastern. 

The numbers of sea mammals and birds attracted Russian hunters, 
and even in the 16th century they had extended their huts (stano- 
vishtcha) to the extreme N. of the island. Many of them wintered for 

	XIX. 27 

years on Novaya Zemlya without great loss from scurvy. Owing to 
the ice in the White Sea Russian hunters found Novaya Zemlya less 
easy of access than did the Norwegians. But about 1877 systematic 
attempts at settlement were made by the Russian government, 
several families of Samoyedes being established at stations on the 
W. coast of the S. island, the chief of which is Karmakuly on Moller 
Bay, where there is a church. Novaya Zemlya is included in the 
Russian province of Archangel, 

History. — Novaya Zemlya seems to have been known to 
Novgorod hunters in the nth century; but its geographical 
discovery dates from the great movement for the discovery of 
the N.E. passage. In 1,553 Sir Hugh Willoughby sighted what 
was probably Goose Land; Richard Chancellor penetrated 
into the White Sea. In 1556 Stephen Borough reached the S. 
extremity of the island, being the first western European to do 
so. William Barents touched the island (1594) at Sukhoy Nos 
(73 46'), and followed the coast N. to the Orange Islands and 
S. to the Kostin Shar. Rumours of silver ore having been found 
induced the Russian government to send out expeditions during 
the second half of the iSth century. In 1760 Sawa Loshkin 
cruised along the E. coast, spent two winters there, and in the 
next year, after having reached Cape Begehrte (Begheerte), 
returned along the W. coast, thus accomplishing the first cir- 
cumnavigation; but the valuable records of his voyage have 
been lost. In 1768 the Russian Lieutenant Rozmyslov reached 
Goose Land and penetrated into the Kara Sea by the Matochkin 
Shar, where he spent the winter; in the following year he pursued 
the exploration of the Kara Sea, but was compelled to return 
and abandon his ship. The first real scientific information about 
the island is due to the expeditions (182 1- 1824) of Count Feodor 
Petrovich Liitke (1 797-1882), after whom part of the N. island 
is named Liitke Land. Nearly all the W. coast as far as Cape 
Nassau, as well as Matochkin Shar, was mapped, and valuable 
scientific information obtained. In 1832 Lieutenant Pakhtusov 
mapped the E. coast as far as Matochkin Shar; and in 1835 
Pakhtusov and Tsivolka his pilot, or commander of his second 
ship, mapped the coast as far as 74 24'. The next expedition 
was that of the naturalist Karl von Baer in 1838. A new era 
of scientific exploration began in 1868, while Norwegian sea- 
hunters brought in valuable geographical information. In 1870 
the Norwegian Captain Johannesen penetrated as far as 79 
E., in 7 6° 13' N., and afterwards accomplished the second 
circumnavigation of Novaya Zemlya. These explorations led 
the way for the famous voyages of Baron Nordenskiold (1875- 
1878), which included investigations in Novaya Zemlya. In 
1877 the Russian Lieutenant, Tyaghin, attempted to cross the 
S. island, and in 1878 M. Grinevetskiy succeeded in doing so. 
Among later expeditions may be mentioned those of C. Nossilov 
(188 7-1 892), T. N. Chernychev (1895) who made a crossing of 
the S. island, H. J. Pearson (1895 and 1897), Lieutenant Borisov 
(1899 and 1900) andO. Ekstam (1900 and 1903). 

See accounts of the expeditions above mentioned, and especially, 
among earlier works, K. E. von Baer, Expedition d Novaia Zemlia et 
en Lapponie (St Petersburg, 1838, &c); and among later works 
H.J. Pearson, Beyond Petsora Eastward, with botanical and geological 
appendices by H. W. Feilden (London, 1899); also I. Sporer, 
Nowaja Senuja (Gotha, 1867); A. P. Engelhardt, A Russian 
Province of the North (Archangel, of which the author was governor), 
translated by H. Cooke (London, 1899). 

NOVEL (from novellus, diminutive of Lat. novus, new; through 
the Italian novella), the name given in literature to a study of 
manners, founded on an observation of contemporary or recent 
life, in which the characters, the incidents and the intrigue are 
imaginary, and, therefore, " new " to the reader, but are founded 
on lines running parallel with those of actual history. • 

1, With the word novel is identified a certain adherence to 
the normal conditions of experience. A novel is a sustained 
story which is, indeed, not historically true, but might very easily 
be so. It is essentially a modern form of literature — that is to say, 
it makes its appearance when the energy of a people has con- 
siderably subsided or has taken purely civic forms, and is ready 
to contemplate and to criticize pictures drawn from conventional 
manners. The novel has been made the vehicle for satire, for 
instruction, for political or religious exhortation, for technical 
information; but these are side issues. The plain and direct 
purpose of the novel is to amuse by a succession of scenes painted 
from nature, and by a thread of emotional narrative. 

It was not until the 18th century that it began to be a 
prominent factor in literary life, and not until the 19th that it 
took a place in it which was absolutely predominant. The 
novel requires, from those who are content to be only fairly 
proficient in it, less intellectual apparatus than any other species 
of writing. This does not militate against the fact that the 
greatest novelists, always a small class, produce work which is as 
admirable in its art as the finest poetry. But the novel adapts 
itself to so large a range of readers, and covers so vast a ground 
in the imitation of life, that it is the unique branch of literature 
which may be cultivated without any real distinction or skill, 
and yet for the moment may exercise a powerful purpose. 

2. Classical Antiquity. — The place held by the novel in an- 
tiquity offers interesting analogies with its position in modern 
times. It was Voltaire, in his Pyrrhonisme de Vhistoire, who set 
the fashion of calling the Cyropaedeia a novel, but it is probable 
that Xenophon, in composing this great work on the education 
of Cyrus, had a purpose that was didactic and historical rather 
than imaginative. The vogue of the novel really began in 
Alexandrian times, when social life was so far settled in tradition 
that the pleasure of reflecting on reality had definitely set in. 
In the 2nd century B.C. a certain Aristides wrote, in six books, 
the Milesiaka, which was probably the beginning of the modern 
novel. These Tales of Miletus, the town in which Aristides lived, 
are lost, but from existing imitations of them in Greek and Latin 
we can gather that they consisted of humorous and sarcastic 
episodes of contemporary life. There seems to be good evidence 
that the bulk of these novelettes, and of the tales which followed 
them, dealt mainly with the adventures of lovers. In the 2nd 
century a.d. Lucian preserved for us invaluable pictures of the 
life in which he moved: his Lucius or the Ass and his True 
History are fantastic and extraordinary fictions in which the 
nature of the novel is not unfrequently approached. But a 
Syrian Christian, Heliodorus, bishop of Tricca in the 4th century, 
may claim to have come much closer to it in his Aethiopica, 
which has the unique merit of being a perfectly pure love story, 
in which the marvellous is not absolutely banished, but in which 
on the whole the solid structure of experience is preserved. 
In the 6th century, as is supposed, a Greek who is called Longus 
(A&yyos) , but of whose life nothing is known, wrote the voluptuous 
pastoral story of Dapknis and Chloe, which is far superior to all 
other remnants of Greek fiction which have come down to us, 
and which is the only one of them which can strictly be called a 
novel. In Latin literature, the Golden Ass of Apuleius is mani- 
festly a translation of a lost Greek book, to which Lucian also 
was indebted. It is probable that in the great age of Roman 
literature prose fiction was cultivated, but we should be limited 
to pure conjecture as to its scope, if we did not possess a fragment 
of a work which is absolutely invaluable to the comparative 
student of literature. If the Satyricon of Petronius was not an 
isolated phenomenon — and it is highly improbable that this was 
the case — then the Romans of the Neronian epoch understood 
to the full the secret of how to produce in prose a satirical, not 
to say cynical, study of manners in fiction. The Satyricon is not 
less skilfully managed than such later novels as Gil Bias or 
Peregrine Pickle, and it is of the same class. From the extent 
of the principal episode which has been preserved, it is supposed 
that this novel was not a short tale of intrigue, but was a sus- 
tained record, drawn up with careful and lengthy observation of 
manners, for the single purpose of entertainment. Unfortunately 
this extraordinary work remains not merely solitary in its class, 
but itself a fragment. In early Christian times, such books as 
The Shepherd of Hernias, and the productions of Palladius and of 
Synesius, indistinctly testified to a certain appetite for prose 
fiction. 

3. Italian. — It was in northern Italy that the novel of modern 
Europe (both the literary type and the name) came into existence. 
A collection of tales, called // Novellino or Cento novelle antiche 
(although only 66 of the 100 survive), was composed at the 
end of the 13th century, and started this class of literature in 
Europe. These anonymous stories are of extraordinary diversity, 
chivalrous, mythological, moral and scandalous. The medieval 
view of women and priests and peasants is found in its full 
development, and there is something of the realistic reflection 
of customs which was to flourish later in a whole class of fiction. 
The earliest Italian novelist whose name is connected with his 
writings is Francesco da Barberino (1264-1348), whose Docu- 
menti oV Amor were first published in 1640. He was followed hy 
the celebrated Giovanni Boccaccio, who wrote his Filocopo 
about 1339 and the Decameron some nine years later. Of his 
disciples the most eminent was Francesco Sacchetti (1335-1400), 
a Florentine. Sacchetti's Trecente novelle, which remained in 
MS. until the 18th century (1724), are ironical and realistic studies 
of the life around him in Tuscany. To Giovanni Fiorentino is 
attributed a collection of 50 tales, called // Pecorone, printed 
first in 1558, but written in 1378. Shakespeare was indebted to 
one of these stories for the plot of The Merchant of Venice. A 
great name in the evolution of European fiction is that of Tom- 
maso Guardato, called Masuccio (i4is?-i477?); he was a native 
of Salerno, and was the first of the south Italian novelists. 
Masuccio imitated no one; his conceptions and his observations 
are wholly his own. His Novellino, printed at Naples in 1476, 
is divided into five books, each containing ten stories. These 
deal satirically with the three favourite subjects of the age — 
namely, jealous husbands, unfaithful wives and debauched 
priests. He was followed in this, as well as in his vivacity, by 
Antonio Cornazzano (1431?-! 500?), an inhabitant of Piacenza, 
who wrote Italian with much greater purity than Masuccio, 
but less vigour. His stories were frequently reprinted, under 
the title of Proverbii. Of the novels of Giovanni Brevio (1480?- 
1562?) only five have been preserved, but these are of unusual 
merit. We then reach Matteo Bandello (1480-1561), long the 
most famous of all the Italian novelists, whose Novelle, first 
issued in 1554, were eagerly read in all parts of Europe; they are 
214 in number. After Bandello the decline of the Italian novella 
is evident. Francesco Maria Molza (1489-1544), whose stories 
appeared in 1547, was a rival to Bandello, and has been preferred 
to him by several modern critics. The Ragionamenti d'Amor 
(1548) of Agnolo Firenzuola (1493-1545) was the work of a poet 
writing in richly embroidered prose. After Firenzuola the great 
school of Italian story-tellers declined. There was no more novel 
writing of any importance in Italy until the close of the 18th 
century, when an admiring study of German literature produced 
the romances of Alessandro Verri (1741-1816) and Ugo Foscolo 
(1778-1827). The first Italian novelist of merit in recent times, 
however, is Alessandro Manzoni (1785-1873), whose / Promessi 
Sposi (1825) enjoyed an unbounded popularity. Manzoni had 
a troop of imitators, but no rivals. In the fourth quarter of the 
19th century Italy produced some very brilliant and original 
novelists, in particular Giovanni Verga (b. 1840), Matilda Serao 
(b. 1856) and Gabriele d'Annunzio (b. 1863). 

4. France. — In the 14th century, when Italy was already 
proceeding in a modern direction, France was satisfied with 
ancient tales of Fierabras or Les Qualre fils d y Aynon, which 
were nothing but epics told in rambling prose. It was not 
until about 1450 that the anonymous Quinze joies du mariage 
showed the French to be influenced by the Italian discovery 
of the novelette of manners. The author of this extraordinary 
work was perhaps Antoine de la Sale who seems certainly to 
have written the whole of the Cent nouvelles nouvelles } imitated 
from Boccaccio and Sacchetti. This bud of realistic fiction, 
however, was immediately nipped by the romances of chivalry, of 
Spanish extraction, which were only destroyed by the vogue of 
Don Quixote. The translation of Montalvo's celebrated Atnadis 
de Gaulc enjoyed at this time an extraordinary popularity. 

The habit of telling tales freely in prose was not, however, 
formed in France until after 1500. Bonaventure Desp6riers 
(d. 1544) was the author of the Cymbalum mundi, and of 
Nouvelles ricr lotions, mordant satires and gay stories. Probably 
to this age also belongs the semi-fabulous B6roaIde de Verville, 
who is supposed to be the author of a collection of facetious 
anecdotes and conversations, Le Moyen de Parvenir. These, 
and other experiments in fiction, lead us up to Rabelais, whose 
magnificent genius adopted as its mode of address the chain of 
burlesque prose narratives which we possess in Gargantua and 
Pantagruel, recording the family history of a race of giant kings, 
but his influence on the novel is insignificant. It was half a 
century later that, in the romantic pastoral of AstrSe f published 
in 1610, France may be said to have achieved her first attempt 
at a novel. This famous book was written by Honore d'Urfe; 
in spite of its absurdities it is full of talent, and succeeds, for 
the first time in the history of French narrative, in depicting 
individual character. D'Urfe was followed, with less originality, 
by Marin LeRoydeGomberville (1 600-1674), who was the author 
of a Mexican romance, Polexandre, and by Gombauld (1570?- 
1666), the author of Endymion (1624). These were fictions of 
interminable adventures, broken by an infinite number of 
episodes; they seem tedious enough to us nowadays, but with 
their refinement of language, and their elevation of sentiment, 
they fascinated readers like Madame de Sevignd. To Gomberville, 
who has been called the Alexandre Dumas of the 17th century, 
succeeded Mdlle de Scudery (1607-1701), who preserved the 
romantic framework of the novel, but filled it up with modern 
and familiar figures disguised under ancient names. Her huge 
romans & clef, tiresome as they are, form the necessary stepping- 
stone between Astrte, in which the novel was first conceived, 
and La Princesse de Cleves, where at last it found perfect 
expression. Meanwhile, the elephantine heroic romances were 
ridiculed by Charles Sorel in his Francion (1622) and Le Berger 
extravagant (1628). Later examples of a realistic reaction 
against the pompous beauty of Gomberville and Scudery were 
the Roman comique (1651) of Scarron and Le Roman bourgeois 
(1666) of Furetiere. 

All these, however, were mere preparations. The earliest 
novelist of France is Marguerite de la Vergne, comtesse de La 
Fayette (1634-1693), and the earliest genuine French novels 
were her Princesse de Montpensier (1662), and her far more im- 
portant Princesse de Cleves (1678). Madame de La Fayette was 
the first writer of prose narrative in Europe who portrayed, as 
closely to nature as she could, the actual manner and conversa- 
tions of well-bred people. To show that she was capable of 
writing in the old style, she published, with the help of Segrais, 
in 1670, a Zayde, which is in the Spanish manner affected by 
Mdlle de Scudery. It was long before the peculiar originality 
of the Princesse de Cleves was appreciated. Meanwhile La 
Fontaine, in 1669, published a fine romance of Psyche*, partly 
in verse, and Fenelon,'in 1699, his celebrated Telimaque. The 
influence of La Bruyere on the novelists, although he wrote no 
novels, must not be overlooked. But the Princesse de Cleves 
remained the solitary novel of moral analysis when its author 
died and the 17th century closed. The successes of Alain Rene 
Lesage seemed to be wholly reactionary. His realistic novels, 
Gil Bias, and Le Diable boiteux, depended upon their comic 
force, their picaresque vivacity, rather than upon the sober 
study of average human character. But Marivaux (1688-1763) 
took up the psychological novel again, and produced in M ari anne 
(1731) and Le Paysan parvenu (1735) analytical stories of 
Parisian manners and character which were wholly modern in 
form. If Marianne was deliberate, the exquisite Manon Lescaut 
(1731), by the Abb6 Pr6vost d'Exiles (1697-1763), was almost 
an accident; but, between them, these simultaneous works 
started the French novel of the analysis of emotion. The brilliant 
stories of Voltaire, which began with Zadig and included Candide, 
hardly belonged to this category; they are rather satires and 
diversions, in which class must also be placed the fashionable 
boudoir novels of Crebillon fils, La Morliere and others. But 
the English taste, exemplified mainly by Richardson, Sterne 
and Fielding, prevailed, and its effect was seen again in the 
imperfect novels of Diderot and Rousseau. The Nouvclle 
Hilo'ise and the £mile of the latter are not skilfully constructed 
as stones, but they mark the starting-point of the novel which 
aims at familiarising the public mind with great ideas in an 
attractively romantic form. The moral purpose is equally 
evident in the famous Paul et Virginie of Bemardin de St 
Pierre. It was less didactically present in Mme de Stael's 
Delphine (1802) and Corinne (1807), where the misinterpreted 
woman of genius, so often depicted since, is first introduced 
to French novel-readers. It was not, however, until about 
1830 that the novel began to be one of the main channels of 
imaginative writing in France, and the development of this 
kind of fiction was one of the main features of the romantic 
revival. Stendhal showed that, without any of the charms 
of style, and relying exclusively upon minute psychological 
observation, the record of a human life could be made enthrall- 
ingly interesting. Alexandre Dumas, under the direct influence 
of Sir Walter Scott, allowed his tropic imagination to revel and 
riot in brilliant chains of adventure. The imaginative novel 
was admirably conceived by George Sand. But it was Balzac 
who filled canvas after canvas with the astounding intensity of 
life itself, and who insisted with irresistible force that the function 
of the novel is to draw a consistent and unprejudiced picture 
of humanity under the strain of a succession of probable passions. 
This has been clearly comprehended by the host of later French 
novelists, whose record cannot be traced here, to be the function 
of the novel, as Mme de La Fayette invented it, as Marivaux 
and Prevdst developed it, and as George Sand and Balzac 
finally laid down its laws and settled its borders. Certain dates, 
however, must be recorded in the briefest record of the evolution 
of the French novel, and 1856 is one of these; in that year 
Gustave Flaubert published Madame Bovary, a work in which 
the rival realistic and romantic tendencies are combined with 
a mastery that had not been approached and has not since 
been equalled. Another is 187 1, when Zola began to roll out 
the enormous canvas of Les Rougon-Macquart. Yet another 
in 1880, when Bottle desuif first revealed in Maupassant a novelist 
whose creations were not merely amusing and striking, but 
absolutely convincing and logical. 

5. English. — If we take no heed of translations of Latin 
stories, such as those from the Gesta Romanorum, we may say 
that the beginning of prose fiction in England is Le Morte 
d' Arthur, of Sir Thomas Malory, finished in or about 1470, 
and printed by Caxton in 1485. The great merits of this writer 
were that he got rid of the medieval burden of allegory, essayed 
an interpretation of the human heart, and invented a lucid and 
vigorous style of narrative. But his book became, as Professor 
VV. Raleigh has said, " the feeder of poetry rather than of prose," 
and it gave no inkling of the methods of the modern novel. 
The same may be said of such versions of the Charlemagne 
Amadis and Palmeria cycles of romances as Huon cf Bordeaux, 
published by Lord Berners, perhaps in 1535, and innumerable 
others. It was the novella of Italy from which the English novel 
first faintly started. Between 1560 and 1580 versions of the 
Italian novelists became exceedingly popular in England. 
Paynter in introducing the tales of Bandello and Straparola 
struck the true novelist's note by offering them not as works of 
morality or edification, but " instead of a merry companion to 
shorten the tedious toil of weary ways." The appreciation of 
these Italian stories led to the composition of the Euphttes of 
Lyly (1579), a book of great interest and merit, which has been 
called " the first original prose novel written in English." This 
is somewhat to exaggerate, since Euphues is rather a work of 
elegant philosophy than a narrative. Lyly had many imitators, 
Munday, Greene, Dickenson, Barnabe Rich, Lodge, Nash and 
others, who formed a school of prose fiction which was not 
without a certain romantic beauty, but which possessed as little 
narrative vigour as possible. To compare a story written by 
Sacchetti in 1385 with one written by Greene in 1585 is to 
perceive that not merely had no progress been made towards the 
modern novel, but that a great deal of ground had been lost. 
The genius of the Elizabethan age lay in the direction of lyrical 
and dramatic poetry, not of prose fiction. The absence of the 
comic element in Elizabethan romances is very marked. M. 
Jusserand has claimed a peculiar merit in this and other respects 
for the Jack Wilton of Nash (1594), which, as he points out, is 
the earliest English example of picaresque literature. During 
the reign of the heroic romances in France, their vogue violently 
affected the English book-market. The huge stories of Calprenede 
and Gomberville were imported, and translated and imitated 
to the exclusion of every other species of prose fiction, between 
1645 and 1670. The long-winded books of Mdlle de Scud6ry, 
especially Cassandra and The Great Cyrus, were read so univers- 
ally in England as to leave their stamp on the national manners. 
Of original English romances, written in competition with the 
French masterpieces of tenderness and chivalry, the Parthenissa 
of Lord Orrery (1654) is the best known. The first definite 
stand against these Gallicized romances was made by, two 
dramatists, Aphara Behn and William Congreve. Congreve's 
Incognita (1692) is remarkable for its light raillery and humour, 
and perhaps deserves as well as any 17th-century composition to 
be called the earliest novel in English. The stories of Mrs Behn 
have the merit of a romantic simplicity of narrative, but they 
are dull and devoid of art. .- But the novel still lingered, unwilling 
to make its appearance in England, and its place was taken during 
the age of Anne by the labours of the essayists. So rich is the 
character painting, so lively the touches of social colour in the 
Spectator and Tatler, that these periodicals have, by enthusiastic 
critics, been styled brilliant examples of prose fiction. But it 
is obvious that in the delightful essays of Addison and Steele 
there was no attempt made at construction, that the sustained 
evolution of characters was not essayed, and that even in the 
studies of Mr Bickerstaff's Club anything like a plot was studiously 
avoided. Yet these are all essential characteristics of Jhe novel, 
and until they make their appearance in English literature we 
must not say that the secret has been discovered. Very near to 
the mystery, if he did not quite grasp it, was Daniel Defoe, who 
introduced into his narrative a minute and rude system of 
realistic observation, by way of giving an impression of truth 
to it. This exactitude he combined with a survival of the old 
picaresque method, the result being those strange and entertain- 
ing works Colonel Jack (1722) and Roxana (1724). Still closer 
he came to positive success in the immortal narrative of Robinson 
Crusoe, in which the fascination of the desolate island was first 
worked up in English. 

6. Not even yet had the English novel been invented. It came 
into the world in 1740 from the unconscious hands of Samuel 
Richardson (1680-1761), who had hit upon the notion that 
morality might be helped and young persons of inexperience 
protected by the preparation of a set of letters exchanged between 
imaginary persons. The result was Pamela: or Virtue Rewarded, 
a book which is in every strict sense the earliest English novel. 
It has even a claim to be considered the earliest European novel 
of the modern kind, for the assumption of French criticism that 
Richardson borrowed his ideas and his characters from the 
Marianne of Marivaux is not supported by evidence. There is 
no reason to suppose that Richardson met with the name of 
Marivaux earlier than 1749., At all events, it would seem to be 
certain that, whether in France or England, the fourth decade of 
the 18th century saw the spontaneous conception of this " new 
species of writing." The name of the heroine of Richardson's 
book was Miss Pamela Andrews, and the second English novel 
was Fielding's Joseph Andrews (1742), which started as a mere 
burlesque of Pamela, but proceeded upon admirably original 
lines of its own, in a study of the humours and manners of con- 
temporary country life.. Fielding rejected the epistolary artifice 
of Richardson, and told his story in a straightforward narrative, 
broken indeed by arguments and ejaculations which bound the 
new novel to the old essay of the Spectator type. The creative 
force of Fielding filled the pages of this book with a crowd of 
vividly-presented characters, and this marked a step in advance, 
for Richardson's practice was to concentrate minute attention 
upon only one or two figures. It was from Richardson that 
the next important fiction came, in the shape of the long-drawn 
tragedy of Clarissa (1748). But a third great novelist was now 
at work; in 1748 appeared the Roderick Random of Smollett, 
and here we have neither the sculptural manner of Richardson 
nor the busy world of Fielding's realism, but a comic impression 
founded on an artful employment of emphasis and exaggeration. 

Smollett gives us neither breathing statues nor a crowd of men 
and women, but a gallery of " freaks," arranged with great art, 
indeed, but exhibited in such a way as to expose not their likeness 
but their unlikeness to the common stock of humanity. It is 
very important to note this curious divergency between the three 
great writers, because they exemplified the three classes into 
which almost all subsequent novels can with more or less ease be 
divided. The. next move was made by Fielding, who in 1749 
published his Tom Jones % Starting with the pungent horror of 
hypocrisy ever before him, Fielding constructs a fragment of the 
world in which men and women are seen, without exaggeration, 
plying their daily. trades under the eye of an impartial observer 
who can penetrate to their secret motives. This was a great 
advance, and a still greater one was the sustained skill with which 
the author conducted the plot, the interwoven series of the actions 
of his characters. l£ may almost be said that until the publica- 
tion of Tom Jones no novel with a real plot had been conceived 
in English. The rivalry of the great novelists of this time was 
of signal help to them, and there can be no question that the 
astounding richness of Tom Jones stirred Smollett to the exercise 
of increased energy in Peregrine Pickle (1751), a coarse and savage 
book, illuminated by brilliant flashes of humour. A better, 
because a tenderer and truer study of life was Amelia, which 
Fielding published in the same year; yet most readers have 
found this novel a little languid after Tom Jones. But if the 
ideal of life depicted in it was quieter and sadder, it was perhaps 
for that very reason more in harmony with the facts of life. 
Now Richardson, who had long been silent, reasserted his mastery 
of epistolary analysis in the huge History of Sir Charles Crandison 
(1753), in which, as its admirers claimed, " all the recesses of the 
human heart are explored and its whole texture unfolded." 
Richardson had scarcely been affected by the experiments of 
his contemporaries, of the very nature of which he affected to 
be ignorant, and the result is that in his third and last novel he 
depends entirely on qualities which he had already developed, 
and owes nothing to the discoveries of others. 

7. With this book, the first great group of English novels 
comes to a close, and we may observe that in these eight stories 
everything is to be found, in germ if not in full evolution, which 
was during the next century and a half to make the abundant 
out-put of the English novel prominent. New forms, above all 
new subjects, were to present themselves to the imagination of 
capable British novelists, but the starting-point of every ex- 
periment was to be discovered in the ripest work of Richardson, 
Fielding and Smollett. Their influence was manifest in the 
writings of the second school of English novelists, in whom, 
however, several interesting varieties of subject and treatment 
were discovered. The Tristram Shandy (1750-1766) of Sterne, is 
the most masterly example in English of a humour which goes 
direct to pathos for its most " sentimental " effects, and of the 
kind of loosely-strung, reflective fiction which is hardly a narra- 
tive at all. Neither Tristram Shandy nor A Sentimental Journey 
(1768) can properly be included among novels. In Rasselas 
(1759) Dr Johnson showed that the new kind of writing could 
be used to give entertainment to a sermon ,and in this he was 
to have a multitude of followers. In Chrysal (1760) Charles 
Johnstone (d. 1800) showed that the picaresque romance could 
still exist, tinctured by the newly-found art of the novelist. In 
The Castle ofOtranto (1764) Horace Walpole adapted the methods 
of the novelist to a pseudo-historical theme of horror and romance, 
and prophesied of Walter Scott. In The Vicar of Wakefield 
(1766) Goldsmith was indebted to most of his immediate pre- 
decessors, but fused their qualities in an amalgam of gentle wit 
and delicate sweetness and conversational brevity which has 
made his one loosely-constructed novel a foremost classic of our 
literature. Thus, in the one quarter of a century which, divides 
Pamela from The Vicar of Wakefield, English novel-writing was 
born, grew into full maturity, and adopted its adult and final 
forms. 

8. During the remainder of the 18th century, little or nothing 
was done to extend the range of prose fiction in England; but one 
or two of those departments of novel-writing which had already 
been invented were developed and adapted to changing taste. 
In particular, the rapid increase of reticence and refinement in 
conversation made such a novel in letters as Smollett's Humphrey 
Clinker (1771) repulsively coarse to women of delicacy, who 
were charmed on the other hand with the Evelina of Frances 
Burney (1778). These two typical books are composed on the 
same plan, yet essentially a whole age lies between the former 
and the latter. What has been called " the novel of the tea- 
table " now came into existence, and the 18th century was 
about to close in mediocrity, when its credit was partially saved 
by a development of Horace Walpole's romance of terror in the 
vigorous and sensational narratives of Anne RadclifTe (1764- 
1823), whose Mysteries of Udolpho appeared in 1794. The same 
year saw the publication of Caleb Williams, in which William 
Godwin (1756-1836) evolved a tragic theory of politics. A finer 
study than either of the works just mentioned, although not 
truly a novel, was the gorgeous and sinister Vathek (1786) of 
William Beckford, an oriental tale of horror. In all these books 
there existed an element of grotesque mingled* with romantic 
colour, which announced the coming revival. 

9. The two schools here indicated, and they may be roughly de- 
fined as the school of the Tea-Table and the school of the Skeleton- 
in-the-Cupboard, did not, however, betray their real significance 
until the second decade of the 19th century, when after several 
unimportant efforts, they developed into the novel of psycho- 
logical satire and the romance of historical imagination. Two 
writers, the greatest who had yet attempted to address English 
readers through prose fiction, almost simultaneously came 
forward as the protagonists in these two spheres of work. Jane 
Austen published Seme and Sensibility in 181 1, Walter Scott 
Waverley in r8i4. These were epoch-making dates; in each 
case a new era opened for the countless readers of novels. The 
first-named writer, all exactitude, conscience and literary art, 
worked away at her " little bit (two inches wide) of ivory" ; the 
other* with bold and flowing brush, covered vast spaces with 
his stimulating and noble compositions. "It is, however, to be 
noted that the isolation in which we now regard these great 
writers — a solitude & deux only broken in measure by the presence 
of Miss Maria Edgeworth — is an optical delusion due to the veils 
of distance. The bookshops from 18 10 to 1820 and onwards were 
thronged and glutted with novels, many of them infinitely more 
successful, as far as sales were concerned, than the most popular 
of Miss Austen's works. The novels of Miss Austen were written 
between 1796 and 1810, although published from 181 1 to 18 18; 
those of Sir Walter Scott date from 1814 (Waverley) to 1829 
(Anne of Geierstein). ' Practically speaking, no additions were 
made to the formula of the social novel or of the historical 
romance, to the study of national manners, that is to say, from 
the satirical or from the picturesque point of view, until a quarter 
of a century later. 

10. The next artist in prose fiction whose force of invention 
was sufficient to start the novel on wholly fresh tracks was born 
forty years later than Scott. This was Charles Dickens, whose 
Pickwick Papers (1836) marks another epoch in novel writing. 
His career of prodigal production ceased abruptly in 1870, by 
which time it had long been obvious that he was the pioneer of a 
great and diverse school of novelists, all born within the second 
decade of the century. Of these Thackeray was not really 
made obvious until Vanity Fair (r849), nor Charlotte Bronte till 
Jane Eyre (r847), nor Mrs Gaskell till Mary Barton (1848), nor 
George Eliot till Adam Bede (r859). The most noticeable point 
on which the five illustrious novelists of the Early Victorian age 
resembled one another and differed from all their predecessors, 
was the sociological or even humanitarian character of their 
writings. All of them had projects of moral or social reform close 
at heart, all desired to mend the existing scheme of things. In 
several of them, particularly in Dickens and Miss Bronte", the 
element of insubordination is extremely marked; it is present in 
them all; and a determination not to be content to see life 
beautifully, through coloured glasses, or to be content with a 
sarcastic travesty of it, but to realize in detail its elements of 
pain and injustice. The novel, which had already learned to. 
compete with all the amusing sections of literature, became the 
successful rival of the serious ones also. The task of the novelist 
was, therefore, so far as the indication of the scope of his particular 
kind of art is concerned, now complete. The names of Anthony 
Trollope, Charles Kingsley, Charles Reade, George Meredith, 
Thomas Hardy and Robert Louis Stevenson represent, in their 
least challenged form, different movements in novel- writing 
during the second half of the 19th century; we must be content 
here to refer for particulars concerning them to the separate 
biographical articles. 

11. Spain. — Prose narrative in Spain practically begins in the 
. 15th century with chronicles and romances of chivalry, tempered 

occasionally and faintly by some knowledge of what had been 
attempted in Italy by Boccaccio. The Spanish version of 
Amadis de Gaula, in which the romance of knight errantry 
culminated, belongs to 1508; the lost original is supposed to 
have been Portuguese. This was the only book of its class 
which is saved from the burning in Don Quixote; it was followed 
by Palmerin of England. These interminable books, and a 
hundred worse than they, occupied the leisure of 16th-century 
readers of both sexes. Without approaching the form of novels, 
they prepared the ground for novel-reading. The exploration 
of America led to the composition of monstrous tales of the New 
World, which generally took the form of continuations of Amadis. 
A new thing was begun in 1554, when the anonymous picaresque 
romance of Lazarillo de Tormes started the story of fantastic 
modern adventure; this highly entertaining book has been 
called the 16th-century Pickwick ', and Mr Fitzmaurice-Kelly 
remarks that it " fixed for ever the type of the comic prose epic." 
The pastoral romance, in the hands of Jorge de Montem6r (d. 
1561), who wrote an insipid Diana which was popular /or a while 
throughout Europe, took readers a step backward, away from 
the ultimate path of the novel. It is of interest to us, however, 
to note that it was in one of these " vain imaginings," in his 
pastoral romance of Galatea, that Cervantes approached the 
field of fiction, in 1585. Few of his peculiar merits are to be 
found in this early work; he turned' for the present to the 
composition of plays. It was not until 1604 that he returned 
to prose fiction by printing his immortal Don Quixote, which 
made an epoch in the history of the novel. This book was 
originally intended to ridicule the already fading passion for the 
romances of chivalry, but it proceeded much further than that, 
and there is hardly any branch of fiction which may not be 
traced back to the splendid initiation of some chapter of Don 
Quixote. In 1613 Cervantes published his twelve Exemplary 
Novels; these are not so well known as the great romance, and 
they owed not a little of their form to Italian sources, but they 
are very brilliant. One of the best anonymous Spanish stories 
of the period, The Mock Aunt, is a type of excellence in facetious 
narrative of the sarcastic class; this is now commnonly attributed 
to Cervantes himself. No other novelist of Spain has moulded 
the thought of Europe, but the heroic romance which occupied 
so much of the attention of France in the 17th century was 
invented by a little-known Spanish soldier, P6rez de Hita, who, 
about 1600, wrote fantastic stories about Granada and the 
Moors. The farcical romance of Fray Gerundio de Campazas, 
1758, by J. F. de Isla (1703-1718), competed in popularity with 
Gil Bias. Speaking broadly, however, Spain made no appreci- 
able progress in novel-writing from the days of Cervantes to 
those of Walter Scott, when the Waverley Novels began to 'find 
such artless imitators as Martinez de la Rosa and Zorrilla. But 
the first original novelist of Spain was Cecilia Bohl de Faber 
(Fernan Caballero) (1796-1877), whose La Gaviota, 1848, a study 
of life in an Andalusian village, was the earliest Spanish novel, in 
the modern sense. She was followed by Valera (1824-1904), by 
Alarc6n (1833-1891), by Pereda (b. 1834), by Perez Gald6s 
(b. 1845) and by Palacio Valdes (b. 1853), in whom the tendencies 
of recent European fiction have been competently illustrated 
without any striking contributions to originality. 

1 2. Germany.— The cultivation of the novel in its proper sense 
began late in Germany. It is usual to consider that H. J. C. von 
Grimmelshausen (i625?-i675) is the earliest German novelist; 
his very curious romance, Abenteuerliche Simplicius Simplicis- 
simus, was printed at Mompelgard in 1669. This is an account of 
the adventures of a simple-minded fellow during the Thirty Years' 
War, and is a chain of episodes, brilliantly recorded, but hardly 
a novel. Early in the 18th century, an extraordinary number of 
imitations of Defoe's great romance were published in Germany, 
and these are known to scholars as the Robinsonaden. Later on, 
Wieland imitated Don Quixote, but the earliest German novel 
which possesses original value is the celebrated work of Goethe, 
The Sorrows of Young Werther (1774). The still more cele- 
brated WUhelm Meister did not appear until 1 796. A third novel, 
Elective Affinities, was published by Goethe in 1809. Meanwhile, 
a very characteristic group of picturesque stories had been issued 
by Johann Paul Richter (Jean Paul) (1763-1825), destined to 
have a wide influence upon romantic literature throughout 
Europe. Purely romantic were the stories of Tieck, of Brentano, 
of Arnim, of Fouque, of Kleist, of Immermann. The German 
novelists of this period wrote like poets, deprived of the discipline 
of verse. In later times novels of high merit have been written 
by Gustav Freytag, Wilibald Alexis (1798-1871), called the 
German Walter Scott, Laube, Fontane, Ebers, Jeremias Gotthelf , 
Berthold Auerbach, Spielhagen, Heyse and many others, but the 
19th century produced no German novelist of commanding 
originality. 

13. Russia. — In Russia alone, among the countries of central 
and eastern Europe, the novel has developed with a radical 
originality. Until the second quarter of the 19th century the 
prose fiction of Russia was confined to imitators of Sir Walter 
Scott, but about the year 1834 Gogol (1800-1852) began to 
revolt against the historico-romantic school and to produce 
stories in which an almost savage realism was curiously blended 
with the Slavonic dreaminess and melancholy. Since then the 
Russian novel has consistently been the novel of resignation and 
pity, but wholly divorced from sentimentality. Gogol was suc- 
ceeded by Gontcharor, Tourgeniev, Dostolevski, Pissemski 
1 8 20-1 881) and Tolstoi, forming the most consistent and, 
doubtless, the most powerful school of novelists which Europe 
saw in the 19th century. The influence of these writers on the 
rest of the world was immense, and even in England, where 
it was least acutely felt, it was significant. That the Russians 
have indicated the path to new fields in the somewhat outworn 
province of novel-writing is abundantly manifest. 

14. Oriental. — In a primitive form, the novel has long been 
cultivated in Asia. It was introduced into China, but whence 
is unknown, in the 13th century, and Le Kuan-chung was the 
first Chinese novelist. The- productions of this writer and of his 
followers are tales of bloody warfare, or record the adventures 
of travellers. The novel called The Twice-Flowering Flum-Trees, 
belonging to the 16th (or 17th) century, is a typical example 
of the moral Chinese novel, written with a virtuous purpose. 
Professor Giles holds that the novel of China reached its highest 
point of development in The Dream of Die Red Cltamber, an 
anonymous story of the end of the 17th century; this is a 
panorama of Chinese social life, " worked out with a completeness 
worthy of Fielding." Prose stories began to be met with in the 
literature of Japan early in the 10th century. But the inventor 
of the Japanese novel was a woman of genius, Murasaki no 
Shikibu, whose Genji Monogalori has been compared to the 
writings of Richardson; it was finished in 1004 and may, there- 
fore, be considered the oldest novel in the world. This book, 
which is one of the great classics of Japan, was widely imitated. 
After the classic period novel-writing was long neglected in Japan, 
but the humours of 17th-century life were successfully translated 
into popular fiction by Saikaku (1 641-1693), and later by Jisho 
and Kiscki, who collaborated in a great number of remarkable 
stories. 

See Dunlop, The History of Fiction (1816); Borroneo, Calalogo 
de' novellieri italiani (1805); Em. Gebhart, Contents du moyen dee 
(1901); E. M. de Vogue, Le Roman russe (1886); Forsyth, Novels 
and Novelists of the 18th Century (1871); Bever and Sansot-Orland, 
CEuvres galantes des contents italiens (1903); Rivadeneyra, Biblio- 
teca de antores espanoles (1846-1880); Gosse, A Century of French 
Romance (1900-1902); G. Pellissier, Le Mouvement liitiraire au 
XIX* sihele (1889); Zola, Les Romanciers naturalistes (1880); 
Le Roman experimental (1879); Brunetiere, Le Roman naturaliste 
(1883); W. Raleigh, The English Novel (1894); V. Chauvin, Les 
Romanciers grecs et latins (1862); Fancan, Le Tombeau des romans 
(1626). (E.G.) 


NOVELDA, a town of E. Spain, in the province of Alicante; 
on the right bank of the river Vinalop6, and on the railway from 
Madrid to Alicante. Pop. (1900) 11,388. The country around 
is flat and fertile, producing much wine, dates, oranges, oil, saffron 
and aniseed. In the town there are tanneries, and manufactures 
of alcohol, chocolate and soap. The women make fine lace. In 
the neighbouring village of Salinetas de Elda there arc warm 
sulphur and saline baths. 


NOVELLI, ERMETE (185 1- ), Italian actor and play- 
wright, was born in Lucca on the 5th of March 1851, the son of a 
prompter. He made his first appearance in 1866, and played 
character and leading comedy parts in the best companies 
between 1871 and 1884. By 1885 he had his own company, 
and made a great success in Paris in 1898 and 1902. He estab- 
lished in Rome in 1900 a new theatre, the Casa di Goldoni, on 
the lines of the Comedie Francaise. He dramatized Gaboriau's 
Monsieur Lecoq, and alone or in collaboration wrote several 
comedies and many monologues. 


NOVELLO, VINCENT (1781-1861), English musician, son of 
an Italian who married an English wife, was born in London 
on the 6th of September 1781. As a boy he was a chorister 
at the Sardinian chapel in Duke Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, 
where he learnt the organ; and from 1796 to 1822 he became 
in succession organist of the Sardinian, Spanish (in Manchester 
Square) and Portuguese (in South Street, Grosvenor Square) 
chapels, and from 1840 to 1843 of St Mary's chapel, Moorfields. 
He was an original member of the Philharmonic Society, of the 
Classical Harmonists and of the Choral Harmonists, officiating 
frequently as conductor. In 1849 he went to live at Nice, where 
he died on the 9th of August 1861. He composed an immense 
quantity of sacred music, much of which is still deservedly 
popular; but his great work lay in the introduction to England 
of unknown compositions by the great masters. The Masses 
of Haydn and Mozart were absolutely unknown in England until 
he edited them, as were also the works of Palestrina, the treasures 
of the Fitzwilliam Museum, and innumerable great compositions 
now well known to every one. His first work, a collection of 
Sacred Music, as performed at lite Royal Portuguese Chapel, 
which appeared in 181 1, has the additional interest of giving 
a date to the practical founding of the publishing firm with which 
his name is associated, as Novello issued it from his own house; 
and he did the same with succeeding works, till his son Joseph 
Alfred Novello (1810-1896), who had started as a bass singer, 
became a regular music publisher in 1829. It was the latter 
who really created the business, and who has the credit of 
introducing cheap music, and departing from the method of 
publishing by subscription. From 1841 Henry Littleton . 
assisted him, becoming a partner in 1861, when the firm became 
Novello & Co., and, on J. A. Novello's retirement in 1866, sole 
proprietor. Having incorporated the firm of Ewer & Co. in 
1867, the title was changed to Novello, Ewer & Co., and still 
later back to Novello & Co., and, on Henry Littleton's death 
in 1888, his two sons carried on the business. 

Vincent Novello had several other children besides his son 
Joseph Alfred. Four of his daughters (of whom the youngest, 
Mary, married Charles Cowden Clarke) were gifted singers; 
but the most famous was Clara Novello (18 18-1908), whose 
beautiful- high soprano and pure style made her one of the 
greatest vocalists, alike in opera, oratorio and on the concert 
stage, from 1833 onwards. In 1843 she married Count Gigliucci, 
but after a few years returned to her profession, and only retired 
in i860. Charles Lamb wrote a poem (To Clara N.) inherpraise. 


NOVEMBER (Lat. novem, nine), the ninth month of the old 
Roman year, which began with March. By the Julian arrange- 
ment, according to which the year began with the 1st of January, 
November became the eleventh month and had thirty days 
assigned to it. The nth of November was held to mark the 
beginning of winter; the sacred banquet called epulum Jovis 
took place on the 13th. It is said that the senate desired to 
rename the month in honour of Tiberius — his birthday occurring 
on the 1 6th, but the emperor declined, saying, " What will you 
do, Conscript Fathers, if you have thirteen Caesars?" The 
Anglo-Saxon names for November were Windmonath, " wind- 
month " and Blodmonath " bloodmonth." In the calendar of 
the first French republic November reappeared partly as 
Brumaire and partly as Frimaire. The principal November 
festivals in the calendar of the Roman Church are: All Saints' 
Day on the 1st, All Souls' on the 2nd, St Martin's on the nth, 
the Presentation of the Virgin on the 21st, St Cecilia's on the 
22nd, St Catherine's on the 25th and St Andrew's on the 30th. 
St Hubert commemorated on the 3rd. In the English calendar 
AH Saints' and St Andrew's are the only feasts retained. 


NOVERRE, JEAN GEORGES (1727-1810), French dancer and 
ballet master, was born in Paris on the 29th of March 1727. 
He first performed at Fontainebleau in 1743, and in 1747 com- 
posed his first ballet for the Opera Comique. In 1748 he was 
invited by Prince Henry of Prussia to Berlin, but a year later 
he returned to Paris, where he mounted the ballets of Gliick 
and Piccini. In 1755 he was invited by Garrick to London, 
where he remained two years. Between 1758 and 1760 he 
produced several ballets at Lyons, and published his Lettres 
sur la danse et les ballets. From this period may be dated the 
revolution in the art of the. ballet for which Noverre was re- 
sponsible. (See Pantomime and Ballet.) He was next engaged 
by the duke of Wurttemburg, and afterwards by the empress 
Maria Theresa, until, in 1775, he was appointed, at the request 
of Queen Marie Antoinette, maitre des ballets of the Paris Opera. 
This post be retained until the Revolution reduced him to 
poverty. He died at St Germain on the 19th of November 1810. 

Noverre *s friends included Voltaire, Frederick the Great and David 
Garrick (who called him " the Shakespeare of the dance "). The 
ballets of which he was most proud were his La Toilette de Virtus \ 
Les Jalousies du sirail t U Amour corsaire and Le Jaloux sans rival. 
Besides the letters, Noverre wrote Observations sur la construction 
d'une nouvelle salle de V Optra (1781); Lettres sur Garrick ecrites & 
Voltaire (1801) ; and Lettre d, un artiste sur les fetes publiques (1801). 


NOVGOROD, a government of N.W. Russia, bounded W. and 
N. by the governments of St Petersburg and Olonets, S.E. by 
Vologda, Yaroslav and Tver, and S.W. by Pskov, stretching 
from S.W. to N.E. 450 m. Area, 47, 22 3 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 
i>555»70<>. The S. is occupied by the Valdai plateau, in which are 
the highest elevations of middle Russia (600 to over 1000 ft.), 
as well as the sources of nearly all the great rivers of the country. 
The plateau is deeply furrowed by valleys with abrupt slopes, 
and descends rapidly towards the basin of Lake Ilmen in the 
W. (only 60 ft. above the sea-level). The N.E. of the government 
belongs to the lacustrine region of N.W. Russia. This tract 
is dotted over with innumerable sheets of water, of which 
Byelo-ozero (White Lake) and Vozhe are the largest of more 
than 3000. Immense marshes, overgrown with thin forests 
of birch and elm, occupy more than one-seventh of the entire 
area of the government; several of them have an area of 300 
to 450 sq. m. each. They admit of being crossed only when 
frozen. Six centuries ago they were even less accessible, but 
the slow upheaval of N.W. Russia, going on at the rate of 3 or 
more feet per century,, has exercised a powerful influence upon 
the drainage of the country. Of recent years artificial drainage 
has been carried out on a large scale. The forests still occupy 
55% of the total area of the government. 

Geologically, Novgorod exhibits in the W. vast beds of Devonian 
limestones and sandstones; these are elsewhere overlaid with 
Carboniferous limestone, dolomite, sandstones and marls. The 
Devonian gives rise to salt-springs, especially at Staraya Russa (S. 
of Lake llmen), and contains iron-ores, while the more recent forma- 
tion has coal strata of inferior quality. The whole is covered with 
a thick sheet of boulder-clay, very often arranged in ridges or eskers, 
the bottom moraine of the N. European ice-sheet of the Glacial 
period. Numerous remains of the neolithic Stone Age are found, 
especially round the extinct lakes. The Baltic and Caspian Sea 
basins are connected by the Mariinsk, Tikhvin and Vyshniy-Volochok 
canals, while the Alexander-von-Wurttemberg canal connects the 
tributaries of the White Sea with those of the Baltic. The chief 
river is the Volkhov, which flows from Lake llmen into Lake Ladoga. 

Other navigable rivers are the Syas, also flowing into Lake Ladoga, 
and the Sheksna and the Mologa, tributaries of the Volga. The 
Msta and the Lovat are the principal streams in the basin of Lake 
Ilmen. All boats from the Volga to St Petersburg pass through 
this government. 

The yearly average temperature at Novgorod is only 40 Fahr. 
(14*5° in January, 62*5° in July). The severe climate, the marshy 
or stony soil, and the want of grazing grounds render agriculture 
unprofitable, though it is carried on everywhere. The yield of 
rye and other cereals is insufficient for the wants of the inha- 
bitants. Fireclay, coal and turf are extracted in commercial 
quantities. Building, smith-work, fishing, shipbuilding, dis- 
tilleries, glass and match factories, sawmills and a variety of 
domestic industries give occupation to about 40,000 families. 
Hunting is still profitable. But most of the inhabitants are 
dependent on the river-boat traffic; and nearly one-fourth of 
the able-bodied males are annually driven to other parts of Russia 
in search of work. The Novgorod carpenters and masons have 
long been -renowned. Trade is chiefly in grain and timber, and 
in manufactures and grocery wares from St Petersburg. The 
fairs are numerous, and several of them (Kirilovsk monastery, 
Staraya Russa and Cherepovets) show considerable returns. 

The inhabitants are almost exclusively Great-Russians, but 
they are discriminated by some historians from the Great- 
Russians of the basin of the Oka, as showing remote affinities 
with the Little-Russians. They belong mostly (o6§%) to the 
Orthodox Greek Church, but there are many Nonconformists. 
There are 10,000 Karelians and 9000 Chudes, with some Jews 
and some Germans. Novgorod is well provided with educa- 
tional institutions, and primary education is widely diffused in 
the villages. (P.A.K.; J. T. Be.) 


NOVGOROD (formerly known as Velikiy-Novgorod, Great 
Novgorod), a town of Russia, capital of the government of the 
same name, and the seat of an archbishop of the Orthodox Greek 
Church, situated 119 m. by rail S. of St. Petersburg, on the low 
flat banks of the Volkhov, 2 m. below the point where it issues 
from Lake Ilmen. Pop. (1900) 26,972. The present town is but 
a poor survival of the wealthy city of medieval times. It con- 
sists of a kremlin (old fortress), and of the city, which stands on 
both banks of the river, connected by a handsome stone bridge. 
The kremlin was much enlarged in 1044, and again in 1116. Its 
stone walls, originally palisades, were begun in 1302, and much 
extended in 1490. Formerly a great number of churches and 
shops, with wide squares, stood within the enclosure. , Its his- 
torical monuments include the cathedral of St Sophia, built in 
1045-1052 by architects from Constantinople to take the place of 
the original wooden structure (989), destroyed by fire in that 
year. Some minor changes were made in 1688 and 1692, but 
otherwise (notwithstanding several fires) the building remained 
unaltered until its restoration in 1 893-1 900. It contains many 
highly-prized relics, including bronze doors of the 12th century, 
one brought reputedly from Sigtuna, the ancient capital of 
Sweden. Another ancient building in the kremlin is the 
Yaroslav Tower, in the square where the Novgorod vyeche 
(common council) used to meet; it still bears the name of " the 
court of Yaroslav " ; and was the chancellery of the secretaries 
of the vyeche. Other remarkable monuments of ancient Russian 
architecture are the church of St. Nicholas erected in 1135, the 
Snamenski cathedral of the 14th century, and churches of the 
14th and 15th centuries. Within the town itself there are four 
monasteries and convents, two of them dating from the nth 
century and two from the 12th century; and the large number 
in the immediate neighbourhood shows the great extent which 
the city formerly had. A monument to commemorate the 
thousandth anniversary of the foundation of Russia (the calling 
in of the Varangians by Novgorod in 862) was erected in 1862. 
Another monument commemorates the repulse of the Napoleonic 
invasion of 1812. 

The date at which the Slavs first erected forts on the Volkhov 
(where it leaves Lake Ilmen and where it flows into Lake Ladoga) 
is unknown. That situated on a low terrace close by Lake 
Ilmen was soon abandoned, and Novgorod or " New-town " 
(in contradistinction to the Scandinavian Aldegjeborg or 
Ladoga) was founded by Scandinavian sea-rovers as Holmgard 
on another terrace which extended a mile lower on both banks of 
the river. The older fort (Gorodishche) still existed in the 13th 
century. Even in the 9th century the new city on the Volkhov 
exercised a kind of supremacy over the other towns of the lake 
region, when its inhabitants in 862 invited the Varangians, under 
the leadership of Rurik, to the defence of the Russian towns of the 
north. Down to the end of the 10th century Novgorod was in 
some sort depended on Kiev; yet in 997 its inhabitants obtained 
from their own prince Yaroslav a charter which granted them 
self-government. For five centuries this charter was the bulwark 
of the independence of Novgorod. From the end of the 10th 
century the princes of Novgorod, chosen either from the sons of 
the great princes of Kiev (until 1136) or from some other branch 
of the family of Rurik, were always elected by the vyeche; but 
they were only its military defenders, and their delegates were 
merely assessors in the courts which levied taxes for the military 
force raised by the prince. The vyeche invariably expelled the 
princes as soon as they provoked discontent. Their election was 
often a subject of dispute between the wealthier* merchants and 
landowners and the poorer classes; and Novgorod, which was 
dependent for its corn supply upou the land of Suzdal, was 
sometimes compelled to accept a prince from the Suzdal branch 
instead of from that of Kiev. After 1270 the city often refused to 
have princes at all, and the elected mayor was the representative 
of the executive. Novgorod in its transactions with other cities 
took the name of " Sovereign Great Novgorod " (Gospodin 
Velikiy Novgorod). The supreme power was in the hands of the 
vyeche. The city, which had a population of more than 80,000, 
was divided into wards, and each ward constituted a distinct 
commune. The wards were subdivided into streets, which 
corresponded to the prevailing occupations of their inhabitants, 
each of these again being quite independent with regard to its 
own" affairs. 

Trade was carried on by corporations. By the Volkhov and 
the Neva, Novgorod — then known also as Naugart and Nov- 
werden — had direct communication with the Hanseatic and 
Scandinavian cities, especially with Visby or Wisby on the 
island of Gotland. The Dnieper brought it into connexion with 
the Bosporus, and it was intermediary in the trade of Constan- 
tinople with northern Europe. The Novgorod traders penetrated 
at an early date to the shores of the White Sea, hunted on 
Novaya Zemlya in the nth century, colonized the basins of the 
northern Dvina, descended the Volga, and as early as the 14th 
century extended their trading expeditions beyond the Urals 
into Siberia. Two great colonies, Vyatka and Vologda, organized 
on the same republican principles as the metropolis, favoured the 
further colonization of N.E. Russia. 

At the same time a number of flourishing minor towns such as 
Novyi Torg (Torzhok), Novaya Ladoga, Pskov, and many others 
arose in the lake region. Pskov soon became quite independent, 
and had a history of its own; the others enjoyed a large measure 
of independence, still figuring, however, as subordinate towns in 
all circumstances which necessitated common action. It is said 
that the population of Novgorod in the 14th century reached 
400,000, and that the pestilences of 1467, 1508 and 1533 carried 
off no fewer than 134,000 persons. These figures, however, seem 
to relate rather to the whole Ilmen region. 

Novgorod's struggle against the Suzdal region (now the govern- 
ment of Vladimir) began as early as the 12th century. In the 
following century it had to contend with the Swedes and the 
Germans, who were animated not only by the desire of territorial 
acquisition, but also by the spirit of religious proselytism. The 
advances of both were checked by battles at Ladoga and Pskov in 
1 240 and 1 242 respectively. Protected by its marshes, Novgorod 
escaped the Mongol invasion of 1240-42, and was able to repel the 
attacks of the princes of Moscow by whom the Mongols were 
supported. It also successfully resisted the attacks of Tver, and 
aided Moscow in its struggle against this -powerful neighbour; 
but soon the ambition of the growing Moscow state was turned 
against itself. The first serious invasion, in 1332, was rolled back 
with the aid of the Lithuanians. But in 1456 the great prince of 
Moscow succeeded in imposing a heavy tribute. Ivan III. of 
Moscow took possession of the colonies in the northern Dvina and 
the Perm regions, and began two bloody wars, during which 
Novgorod fought for its liberty under the leadership of Martha 
Boretskaya, the mayor. In 1475-1478 Ivan III. entered 
Novgorod, abolished its charters, and carried away 1000 of the 
wealthier families, substituting for them families from Moscow; 
the old free city then recognized his sovereignty. A century later 
Ivan IV. (the Terrible) abolished the last vestiges of the inde- 
pendence of the city. Having learned that a party favourable 
to Lithuania had been organized in Novgorod, he took the 
field in 1570. and entered the city (much weakened by the 
recent pestilences) without opposition. His followers killed the 
heads of the monasteries, the wealthier of the merchants 
and clergy, and burned and pillaged the city and villages. No 
fewer than 15,000 men, women and children were massacred 
at Novgorod alone (60,000 according to some authorities). A 
famine ensued, and the district of Novgorod fell into utter 
desolation. Thousands of families were transported to Moscow, 
Nizhniy-Novgorod, and other towns of the principality of 
Moscow. In the beginning of the 17 th century Novgorod was 
taken and held for seven years by the Swedes; and in the 18th 
century the foundation of St Petersburg ultimately destroyed 
its trade. Its position, however, on the water highway from the 
Volga to St Petersburg and on the trunk road from Moscow to 
the capital, still gave it some commercial importance; but even 
this was destroyed by the opening of the Vishera canal, connecting 
the Msta with the Volkhov below the city, and by the construction 
of the railway from St Petersburg to Moscow, which passes 46 m. 
to the east of Novgorod. (P. A. K.; J. T. Be). 


NOVIBAZAR, Novi-Bazar, or Novipazar (ancient Rassia, 
Rascia, or Rashka, Turkish Yenipazar, Le\ " New Market "), a 
sanjak of European Turkey, in the vilayet of Kossovo. Pop. 
(1905) about 170,000. Novibazar is a mountainous region, 
watered by the Lim, which flows north into Bosnia, and by 
several small tributaries of the Servian Ibar. About three- 
fourths of the inhabitants are Christian Serbs, and the remainder 
are chiefly Moslem Albanians, with a few gipsies, Turkish 
officials and about 3000 Austro-Hungarian soldiers. The local 
trade is mainly agricultural. The sanjak is of great strategic 
importance, for it is the N.W. part of the Turkish empire, on the 
direct route between Bosnia and Salonica, and forms a wedge of 
Turkish territory between Servia and Montenegro. The union 
of these powers, combined with the annexation of Novibazar, 
would have impeded the extension of Austrian influence towards 
Salonica. But by the treaty of Berlin (1878) Austria-Hungary 
was empowered to garrison the towns of Byelopolye, Priyepolye, 
Plevlye and other strategic points within the sanjak, although 
the entire civil administration remained in Turkish hands. 
This decision was enforced in 1879. The chief approaches from 
Servia and Montenegro have also been strongly fortified by the 
Turks. 

Novibazar, the capital of the sanjak, is a town of about 12,000 
inhabitants, on the site of the ancient Servian city of Rassia. 
Near it there are Roman baths, and the old church of St Peter 
and St. Paul, the metropolitan church of the bishopric of Rassia, 
in which Stephen Nemanya, king of Servia, passed from the 
Roman to the Greek Church in 1143. 


NOVICE (through French from Lat. novicius or novitius, one 
who has newly arrived, novus, new), a person who joins a religious 
order on probation. He or she is subject to the authority of the 
superior, wears the dress of the order, and obeys the rules. At 
the end of the " novitiate," which must last at least one year, 
the novice is free to leave without taking the vows, and the order 
is free to refuse to allow him or her to take them. - The word was 
early used of a beginner in any art or science, hence an inex- 
perienced person. 


NOVI LIGURE, a town of Piedmont, Italy, in the province of 
Alessandria, from which it is r4 m. S.E. by rail, situated among 
wooded hills, 646 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 17,868. It 
was the scene of a victory by the Austrians and Russians under 
Suvorov over the French in 1 799. It is now an important railway 
junction, the main lines from Turin and Milan to Genoa con- 
verging here. Cotton, silk, coal briquettes, &c, are also manu- 
factured here. 


NOVO-BAYAZET^ a town of Russian Transcaucasia, in the 
government of Erivan, 35 m. E.N.E. of the town of Erivan, and 
4 m. W. of Gok-chai Lake, 5870 ft. above the sea. Pop. 8507 in 
1897, mainly Armenians. An Armenian village which stood here 
was destroyed by Nadir Shah of Persia in 1 736, and it was not 
till the Turkish War of 1828-29 tna t the site was again occupied 
by Armenian refugees from the Turkish town of Bayazet or 
Bayazid. 


NOVOCHERKASSK, a town of Russia, capital of the Don 
Cossacks territory, situated on a hill 400 ft. above the plain, at 
the confluence of the Don with the Aksai, 45 m. from the Sea of 
Azov, and 32 m. by rail N.E. from Rostov. Pop. (1897) 52,005. 
It was founded in 1805, when the inhabitants of the Cherkassk 
stanitsa (now Old Cherkassk) were compelled to leave their 
abodes on the banks of the Don on account of the frequent 
inundations. The town is an archiepiscopal see of the Orthodox 
Greek Church, and possesses a cathedral (1904), a museum, the 
palace of the ataman (chief) of the Cossacks, and monuments to 
M. I. Platov (a Cossack chief) and T. Yermak (1904), the con- 
queror of West Siberia. Wide suburbs extend to the S.W., and 
the right bank of the Aksai is dotted with the villas of the Cossack 
officials. Manufactures make slow progress. An active trade is 
carried on in corn, wine and timber (exports), and manufactures 
and grocery wares (imports). 


NOVOGEORGIEVSK. (1) A town of Russia, usually known 
under the name of Krylov, in the government of Kherson, 
at the confluence of the Tyasmin with the Dnieper, 17 m. W.N.W. 
of Kremenchug. Its fort was erected by the Poles in 161 5. 
The inhabitants carry on a lively trade in timber, grain and 
cattle, and have a few flourmills and candle-works. Pop. 
(1897) 11,214. ( 2 )A first-class fortress of Russian Poland (called 
Modlin till 1831), at the confluence of the Narev (Bug) with the 
Vistula, 23 m. by rail N.W. of Warsaw. Modlin was first fortified 
under the Napoleonic regime in 1807, and in the wars of 1813 
and 1830-31 underwent several sieges. Since that time the 
Russians have made many additions to the works, and the 
place now forms, with Warsaw, Ivangorod and Brest-Litovsk, 
the so-called Polish Quadrilateral. The strength of Nbvo- 
georgievsk lies mainly in the new circle of eight powerful forts, 
erected at a mean distance of 10 m. from the enceinte. The 
importance of the fortress lies in the fact that it prevents Warsaw 
from being turned by a force on the lower Vistula and commands 
the railway between Danzig and Warsaw. 


NOVOMOSKOVSK, a town of Russia, in the government of 
Ekaterinoslav, 16 m/N.E. of the town of Ekaterinoslav. Includ- 
ing several villages which have been incorporated with it, it 
extends for nearly 7 m. along the right bank of the Samara, a 
tributary of the Dnieper. In the 17th century the site was 
occupied by several villages of Zaporogian Cossacks, known 
under the name of Samarchik. In 1687 Prince Golitsuin founded 
here the Ust-Samara fort, which was destroyed after the treaty 
of the Pruth (17 11), but rebuilt in 1736, and the settlement of 
Novoselitsy established. The inhabitants of Novomoskovsk, 
who numbered 23,381 in 1900, are chiefly engaged in agriculture, 
though some are employed in tanneries, and there is a trade in 
horses, cattle, tallow, skins, tar and pitch. In the immediate 
neighbourhood is the Samarsko-Nikolayevskiy monastery, which 
is visited by many pilgrims. 


NOVO-RADOMSK, or Radomsko, a town of Russian Poland, 
in the government of Piotrk6w, 28 m. by rail S.S.W. of the 
town of Piotrkow. It has factories for bentwood furniture, 
woollens and cloth, tanneries, ironworks and sawmills, and is 
the centre of a very active trade. Pop. (1900) 14,464, many 
being Jews. 


NOVOROSSIYSK, a seaport town of S. Russia, in the Cherno- 
morsk or Black Sea territory, on a bay of the same name (also 
named Tsemes), on the N.E. coast of the Black Sea. Pop. 
(1900) 40,384. The bay, nearly 3 m. wide at its entrance on the 
E., and 5 m. deep from E. to W., is exposed to the N.E. wind 
{bora), which sweeps down from the Caucasus Mountains with 
great violence. There is an artificial harbour (1893) protected 
by a mole. Novorossiysk is connected by a branch railway to 
Tikhoryetskaya (169 m.) with the main Caucasian line, which 
crosses the Volga near Tsaritsyn, and has become an important 
centre for the export of corn, and since the petroleum wells 
of Groznyi in northern Caucasia were tapped it has become 
an entrep6t for the export of petroleum. Cement is manufac- 
tured. Large grain elevators have been built, and a new com- 
mercial town has grown up. Besides cereals, which amount to 
69 % of the whole, the exports consist of petroleum and 
petroleum waste, oilcake, linseed, timber, bran, millet seed, 
wool, potash, zinc ore and liquorice, the total annual value 
ranging between 3^ and 5} millions sterling. The imports are 
small. Some 1500 acres in the vicinity of the town are planted 
with vines. Novorossiysk has belonged to Russia since 1829. 


NOWELL, ALEXANDER (c. 1 507-1602), dean of St Paul's, 
London, was the eldest son of John Nowell of Read Hall, Wh alley, 
Lancashire, by his second wife Elizabeth Kay of Rochdale. 
He was educated at Middleton, Lancashire, and at Brasenose 
College, Oxford, where he is said to have shared rooms with 
John Foxe the martyrologist. He was elected fellow of Brasenose 
in 1526. In 1543 he was appointed master of Westminster 
school, and in December 1551 prebendary of Westminster. 
He was elected in September 1553 member of parliament for 
Looe in Cornwall in Queen Mary's first parliament, but in 
October 1553 a committee of the house reported that, having 
as prebendary of Westminster a seat in convocation, he could 
not sit in the House of Commons. He was also deprived of his 
prebend, probably as being a married man, before May 1554, 
and sought refuge at Strassburg and Frankfort, where he 
developed puritan and almost presbyterian views. He submitted, 
however, to the Elizabethan settlement of religion, and was 
rewarded with the archdeaconry of Middlesex, a canonry at 
Canterbury and in 1560 with the deanery of St Paul's. His 
sermons occasionally created some stir, and on one occasion 
Elizabeth interrupted his sermon, telling him to stick to his 
text and cease slighting the crucifix. He held the deanery of 
St Paul's for forty-two years, surviving until the 13th of February 
1602. Nowell is believed to have composed the Catechism 
inserted before the Order of Confirmation in the Prayer Book 
of 1549, which was supplemented in 1604 and is still in use; 
but the evidence is not conclusive. Early in Elizabeth's reign, 
however, he wrote a larger catechism, to serve as a statement 
of Protestant principles; it was printed in 1570, and in the "same 
year appeared his " middle " catechism, designed it would seem 
for the instruction of " simple curates." Nowell also established 
a free school at Middleton and made other benefactions for 
educational purposes. He was twice married, but left no 
children. 

See Ralph Churton, Life of Alexander Nowell (Oxford, 1809); G. 
Burnet, History of the Reformation (new ed., Oxford, 1865) ; and 
R. W. Dixon, History of the Church of England. Also the Works of 
John Strype; the Publications of the Parker Society; the Calendar 
of State Papers, Domestic; and the Diet, Nat. Biog., vol. lv. 


NOWGONG, a town of India, headquarters of the Bundelkhand 
agency and a military cantonment, in the native state of Chhatar- 
pur, on the border of the British district of Jhansi. Pop. (1901) 
11,507. It has accommodation for a force of all arms. The 
college for the education of the sons of chiefs in Central India, 
opened here in 1872, was abolished in 1898, owing to the small 
attendance. 


NOWGONG, a town and district of British India, in the 
Brahmaputra valley division of eastern Bengal and Assam. 
The town is situated on the Kalang river. Pop. (1901) 443°- 
The district of Nowgong has an area of 3843 sq. m. It consists 
of a wide plain overgrown with jungle and canebrakes, intersected 
by numerous tributaries of the Brahmaputra, and dotted with 
shallow marshes. The Mikir hills cover an area of about 65 m. 
by 35 in the S. of the district; the highest peak is about 3500 ft. 
The slopes are very steep, and are covered with dense forest. 
The Kamakhya hills near the bank of the Brahmaputra, are 
about 1500 ft. high. On the summit of the highest peak is a 
celebrated temple of Kamakhya, the local goddess of love, 
where three annual festivals are held. The staple crop is rice. 
Tea cultivation and manufacture are carried on by European 
capital and under European supervision, though the soil and 
climate are not so favourable as in Upper Assam. The population 
in 1 901 was 261,160, showing a decrease of 24-8% in the decade, 
due to the extreme unhealthiness of the climate. In the previous 
ten years the number of deaths recorded from fever and kala 
azar was 93,824. The section of the Assam-Bengal railway 
from Gauhati to the hills passes through part of the district, 
but not very near Nowgong town; and feeder roads to the 
stations lead from the main road that runs parallel to the Kalang 
river. 
See Nowgong District Gazetteer (Calcutta, 1905). 


NOWSHERA, or Naushahra, a town and cantonment in 
Peshawar district of the North-West Frontier Province of 
India, situated on the right bank of the Kabul river 27 m. E. of 
Peshawar. Pop. (1901) 9518. It is the headquarters of a 
brigade in the 1st division of the northern army, and also the 
junction for the frontier railway that runs to the station of 
Mardan and continues to Dargai and Malakand on the route to 
Chitral. 


NOY, WILLIAM (1577-1634), English jurist, was born on the 
family estate of Pendrea in Buryan, Cornwall, in 1577, his 
father belonging to a family whose pedigree is included in the 
visitation of Cornwall in 1620. He went to Exeter College, 
Oxford, but left without taking a degree. He entered Lincoln's 
Inn in 1594. From 1603 until his death he was elected, with 
one exception, to each parliament, sitting invariably for a 
constituency of his native county. For several years his sym- 
pathies were in antagonism to the court party. Every commis- 
sion that was appointed numbered Noy among its members, 
and even those who were opposed to him in politics acknowledged 
his learning. A few years before his death he was drawn over 
to the side of the court, and in October 1631 he was created 
attorney-general, but was never knighted. It was through his 
advice that the impost of ship-money was levied. Noy had long 
suffered from stone, and died in great agony on the 9th of 
August 1634; two days later he was buried at New Brentford 
church. His principal works are On the Grounds and Maxims of 
the Laws of this Kingdom (1641) and The Compleat Lawyer (1661). 


NOYON, a city of N. France, in the department of Oise, 
67 m. N.N.E. of Paris by the railway to Brussels. Pop. (1906) 
5968* Noyon is built at the foot and on the slopes of a hill, and 
traversed by a small stream, the Verse, which joins the Oise 
1 m. farther down. The old cathedral of Notre-Dame, con- 
structed on the site of a church burned in 1 131, is a fine example 
of the transition from Romanesque to Gothic architecture. 
In plan it is a Latin cross, with a total length from E. to W. of 
about 340 ft.; the height of tne nave vaulting is 75 ft. The west 
front has a porch, added in the 14th century, and two unfinished 
towers, their upper portions dating from the 13th century; 
its decorations have been greatly mutilated. The nave consists 
of eleven bays, including those of the W. front, which, in the 
interior, forms a kind of transept. In the windows of the aisles, 
the arches of the triforium, and the windows of the clerestory 
the round type is maintained; but double pointed arches appear 
in the lower gallery; and the vaults of the roof, originally 
six-ribbed, were rebuilt after a fire in 1293 in the prevailing 
Pointed style. The transepts have apsidal terminations. Side 
chapels were added in the N. aisle in the 14th century and in the 
S. aisle in the 15th and the 16th, one of the latter (15th) is especi- 
ally rich in decorations. The flying buttresses of the building 
were restored in the 19th century in the style of the 12th century. 
From the N.W. corner of the nave runs the western gallery of a 
fine cloister erected in 1230; and next to the cloister is the 
chapter-house of the same date, with its entrance adorned with 
statues of the bishops and other sculpture. The bishops' tombs 
within the cathedral were destroyed during the Revolution. 
The chapel of the bishops' palace is an example of the Early 
Pointed style; the canons' library was built of wood early in 
the 16th century; and the town-hall (Gothic and Renaissance) 
dates from-1485-1523. Among the town manuscripts is the 
Red Book or communal charter of Noyon. Remains of the 
Roman walls may be traced. There is a statue to Jacques 
Sarrazin, the painter (1592-1660), a native of the town. Noyon 
"has good trade in grain and live-stock, and contains chemical 
and artificial manure works, tanneries and ironfoundries and 
carries on sawmilling and sugar manufacture. 

Noyon, the ancient Noviomagus Veromanduorum, was 
christianized by St Quentin at the close of the 3rd century; 
and about 530 St Medard, bishop of the district of Vermandois, 
transferred his see thither from St Quentin. The episcopate 
of St Eligius towards the middle of the 7th century, the burial 
of Chilperic I., the coronation of Pippin the Short in 752, and 
on the same occasion the coronation of his infant son Carloman 
with the title of king of Noyon, the coronation of Charlemagne 
in 768 and the election of Hugh Capet in 987, the plunder of the 
town by the Normans in 859 are the chief events in the history 
of Noyon down to the 10th century. Till the Revolution the 
bishopric was one of the ecclesiastical peerages of the kingdom. 
At the beginning of the 12th century Noyon easily obtained a 
communal charter through the favour of its bishops. The extent 
of the bishopric was considerably curtailed towards the middle 
of the 1 2th century by the breaking off of the diocese of Tournai. 
Noyon was ravaged by the English and the Burgundians during 
the Hundred Years' War. In 1516 a truce was signed there 
by Francis I. and Charles V. The city was captured by the 
Spaniards in 1552, and afterwards by the Leaguers, who were 
expelled in 1594 by Henry IV. John Calvin was born at Noyon 
in 1509. 

See A. Lefranc, Histoire de Noyon jusqu'd la fin du XIII* Steele 
(Paris, 1887). 


NOZU, MICHITSURA, Marquess (1840-1908), Japanese 
field-marshal, was born in Satsuma. He fought against the 
Satsuma rebels in 1877, became a general in 1894 and led the 
Hiroshima division at the battle of Pingyang (1894). He 
succeeded Yamagata in the command-in-chief of the'Manchurian 
army, and fought in that capacity throughout the China- Japan 
War, being raised to the rank of viscount (1895). He commanded 
the fourth army in the Russo-Japanese War, and received a 
marquessate at its close. He died in 1908. 


NUBAR PASHA (1825-1899), Egyptian statesman, was born 
at Smyrna in January 1825, the son of an Armenian merchant 
named Moghreditch, who had married a relative of Boghos Bey, 
an influential minister of Mehemet Ali. Boghos had promised to 
interest himself in the future of his young relative, and at his 
suggestion he was sent first to Vevey, and then to Toulouse, to be 
educated by the Jesuits, from whom he acquired a very perfect 
knowledge of French, and perhaps that singular suppleness and 
subtlety of character by which he was mainly distinguished. 
Before he was eighteen he went to Egypt, and after some eighteen 
months' training as secretary to Boghos, who was then minister of 
both commerce and foreign affairs, he was made second secretary 
to Mehemet Ali. In 1845 ne became first secretary to Ibrahim 
Pasha, the heir apparent, and accompanied him on a special 
mission to Europe. Abbas Pasha, who succeeded Ibrahim in 
1848, maintained Nubar in the same capacity, and sent him in 
1850 to London as his representative to resist the pretensions of 
the sultan, who was seeking to evade the conditions of the treaty 
under which Egypt was secured to the family of Mehemet Ali. 
Here he was so completely successful that he was made a bey; 
in 1853 he was sent to Vienna on a similar mission, and remained 
there until the death of Abbas in July 1854. The new viceroy, 
Said, at once dismissed him from office, but two years after- 
wards appointed him his chief secretary, and later gave him 
charge of the important transport service through Egypt to 
India. Here Nubar was mainly instrumental in the completion 
of railway communication between Cairo and Suez, and ex- 
hibited strong organising ability combined with readiness of 
resource. After a second time falling a victim to Said's caprice 
and being dismissed, he was again sent to Vienna, and returned as 
principal secretary to Said, a position he held till Said's death in 
January 1863. 

On the accession of Ismail Pasha, Nubar Bey was in the prime 
of life. He was already on friendly terms with him; he even 
claimed to have saved his life — at all events, it was a coincidence 
that the two had together refused to travel by the train the 
accident to which caused the death (on the 14th of May 1858) of 
the prince Ahmed, who would otherwise have succeeded Said. 
Ismail, himself a more capable man than his immediate pre- 
decessors, at once recognized the ability of Nubar, and charged 
him with a mission to Constantinople, not only to notify his 
accession, but to smooth the way for the many ambitious projects 
he already entertained, notably the completion of the Suez Canal, 
the change in title to that of khedive and the change in the order 
of succession. In the first of these he was completely successful; 
the sultan, believing as little as every one else that the canal 
was anything more than a dream, gave his consent at a price the 
moderation of which he must afterwards have regretted. The 
gratified Ismail created Nubar a pasha, and the sultan himself, 
persuaded to visit Cairo, confirmed the title so rarely accorded to a 
Christian. Half the work was, however, yet to be done, and 
Nubar was sent to Paris to complete the arrangements, and to 
settle the differences between Egypt and the Canal Company. In 
what he used to call " an expensive moment of enthusiasm," he 
left these differences to the arbitration of the emperor Napoleon 
III. and cost Egypt four millions sterling. On his return he was 
made Egypt's first minister of public works, and was distinguished 
for the energy which he threw into the creation of a new depart- 
ment; but in 1866 he was made minister of foreign affairs, and 
at once went on a special mission to Constantinople, where he 
succeeded in the other two projects that had been left in abeyance 
since his last visit. In June 1867 Ismail was declared khedive 
of Egypt, with succession in favour of his eldest son. Nubar 
new had a harder task to undertake than ever before. The 
antiquated system of " capitulations " which had existed in the 
Ottoman empire since the 15th century had grown in Egypt to 
be a practical creation of seventeen imperia in itnperio: seven- 
teen consulates of seventeen different powers administered seven- 
teen different codes in courts before which alone their subjects 
were amenable. A plaintiff could only sue a Frenchman in the 
French court, with appeal to Aix; an Italian in the Italian 
court, with appeal to Ancona; a Russian in the Russian court, 
with appeal to Moscow. Nubar's bold design, for which alone he 
deserves the credit, was to induce these seventeen powers to 
consent to abandon their jurisdiction in civil actions, to sub- 
stitute mixed International Courts and a uniform code binding 
on all. That in spite of the jealousies of all the powers, in spite 
of the opposition of the Porte, he should have succeeded, places 
him at once in the first rank of statesmen of his period. Nubar 
made no attempt to get rid of the criminal jurisdiction exer- 
cised by the consular representatives of the foreign powers 
— such a proposal would have had, at that time, no chance of 
success. 

The extravagant administration of Ismail, for which perhaps 
Nubar can hardly be held wholly responsible, had brought Egypt 
to the verge of bankruptcy, and Ismail's disregard of the judg- 
ments of the Court at last compelled Great Britain and France 
to interfere. Under pressure, Ismail, who began to regret the 
establishment of the International Courts, assented to a mixed 
ministry under Nubar, with Rivers Wilson as minister of finance 
and de Blignieres as minister of public works. Nubar, finding 
himself supported by both Great Britain and France, tried to 
reduce Ismail to the position of a constitutional monarch, and 
Ismail, with an astuteness worthy of a better cause, took ad- 
vantage of a somewhat injudicious disbandment of certain 
regiments to incite a military rising against the ministry. 
The governments of Great Britain and France, instead of 
supporting the ministry against the khedive, weakJy con- 
sented to Nubar's dismissal; but when this was shortly fol- 
lowed by that of Rivers Wilson and de Blignieres they realized 
that the situation was a critical one, and they succeeded in 
obtaining from the sultan the deposition of Ismail and the sub- 
stitution of his son Tewfik as khedive (1879). Nubar remained 
out of office until 1884. 

In the interval Great Britain had intervened in Egypt — the 
battle of Tel-el-Kebir had been fought, Arabi had been banished, 
and Sir Evelyn Baring (afterwards earl of Cromer) had succeeded 
Sir Edward Malet. The British government, under the advice 
of Baring, insisted on the evacuation of the Sudan, and Sherif 
having resigned office, tbe more pliant Nubar was induced to 
become premier, and to carry out a policy of which he openly 
disapproved, but which he considered Egpyt was forced to 
accept under British dictation. At this period he used to say, 
" I am not here to govern Egypt, but to administer the British 
government of Egypt. I am simply the greaser of the official 
wheels." It might have been well if Ntfbar had confined himself 
to this modest programme, but it was perhaps hardly to be 
expected of a man of his ability and restless energy. It must be 
admitted, however, that the characters of Nubar and Lord 
Cromer were not formed to run in harness, and it was with no 
surprise that the public learnt in June 1888 that he had been 
relieved of office, though his dismissal was the direct act of the 
khedive Tewfik, who did not on this occasion seek the advice 
of the British agent. Riaz Pasha, who succeeded him, was, with 
one interval of eight months, prime minister until April 1894, 
when Nubar returned to office. By that time Lord Cromer had 
more completely grasped the reins of administration as well as 
of government, and Nubar had realized more clearly the rdle 
which an Egyptian minister was called on to play: Lord Cromer 
was the real ruler of Egypt, and the death of Tewfik in 1800 
had necessitated a more open exercise of British authority. 
In November 1895 Nubar completed his fifty years of service, 
and, accepting a pension, retired from office. He lived little 
more than three years longer, spending his time between Cairo 
and Paris, where he died in January 1899 at the age of seventy- 
four. (C. F. M. B.) 


NUBIA, a region of north-east Africa, bounded N. by Egypt, 
E. and W. by the Red Sea and the Libyan Desert respectively, 
and extending S. indefinitely to about the latitude of Khartum. 
It may be taken to include the Nile valley from Assuan near the 
First Cataract southwards to the confluence of the White and 
Blue Niles, stretching in this direction for about 560 m. between 
16 and 24 N. Nubia, however, has no strictly defined limits, 
and is little more than a geographical expression. The term 
appears to have been unknown to the ancients, by whom every- 
thing south of Egypt was vaguely called Ethiopia, the land of 
the dark races. It is first associated historically, not with any 
definite geographical region, but with the Nobatae, a negro people 
removed by Diocletian from Kharga oasis to the Nile valley above 
Egypt (Dodecaschoenus), whence the turbulent Blemmyes had 
recently been driven eastwards. From Nuba, the Arabic form 
of the name ef this people, comes the modern Nubia, a term 
about the precise meaning of which no two writers are in accord. 
Within the limits indicated the country consists mainly of sandy 
desert and rugged and arid steppes and plateaus through which 
the Nile forces its way to Upper Egypt. In this section of the 
river there occurs a continuous series of slight falls and rapids, 
including all the historical " six cataracts," beginning below 
Khartum and terminating at Philae. Between those places the 
river makes a great S-shaped bend, the region west of the Nile 
within the lower bend being called the Bayuda Desert, and that 
east of the Nile the Nubian Desert. The two districts roughly 
correspond to the conventional divisions of Upper and Lower 
Nubia respectively. Except along the narrow valley of the Nile 
only the southernmost portion of Nubia contains arable land. 
The greater part is within the almost rainless zone. An auri- 
ferous district lies between the Nile and the Red Sea, in 22 N. 
Politically the whole of Nubia is now included either in Egypt or 
the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, and has no administrative existence. 

Ethnology. — As an ethnical expression the term Nuba or 
Nubian has little value. Rejected by the presumable descend- 
ants of Diocletian's Nobatae, who now call themselves Berber 
or Barabara, it has become synonymous in the Nile valley with 
" slave," or " negro slave." This is due to the large number of 
slaves drawn by Arab dealers from the Nuba negroes of Kordofan, 
who appear to constitute the original stock of the Nubian races 
(but sec Hamitic Races). On the other hand, the name has 
never included all the inhabitants of Nubia. Peoples of three 
distinct stocks inhabit the country— the comparatively recent 
Semitic Arab intruders, mainly in Upper Nubia, the Beja 
(? Hamitic) family of tribes (the Ababda, Bisharin, Hadendoa, 
Beni-Amer, &c), everywhere between the Nile and tbe Red Sea; 
and the Nubians (Nuba or Barabira), in Lower Nubia, where 
they are now almost exclusively confined to the banks of the 
Nile, from Assuan southwards to Dongola. Ethnologically these 
modern Nubians are a very mixed people, but their affiliation to 
negroes or negroids, which is based on physical and linguistic 
grounds, is confirmed tfy what is known of the history of the 
Nilotic peoples. 

The first inhabitants of the region beyond Egypt appear to 
have been the Uaua, whose name occurs in an inscription on a 
tomb at Memphis of the Vlth Dynasty, and again constantly in 
subsequent inscriptions down to the time of the Ptolemies, as the 
chief negro race to the south of Syene. (For the history of the 
country during this period see Ethiopia). It thus appears that 
throughout the historic period down to the arrival of the Romans 
the Nile-country above Egypt was occupied by a negro people. 
Egyptian monuments are found as far south as Mount Barkal 
(Napata), but no Egyptian settlements beyond Syene. Hence 
these Uaua negroes probably remained unaffected, or very 
slightly affected, by foreign elements until about the 3rd century 
a.d. Their domain then began to be encroached upon from the 
east by the Blemmyes, who have been identified with the present 
Beja of the Nubian desert. It was owing to their incessant raids 
that Diocletian withdrew the Roman garrisons above the 
cataracts, and called in the warlike Nobatae to protect the 
Egyptian frontier from their attacks. These negro Nobatae, 
originally from Kordofan, as is now evident, had advanced to. the 
Great Oasis (Kharga) in Upper Egypt, whence they passed into 
the Nile valley between the cataracts. Here they absorbed the 
older Uaua of kindred stock, and ultimately came to terms with 
the Blemmyes. The two races even became intermingled, and, 
making common cause against the Romans, were defeated by 
Maximinus in 451. * 

The Blemmyes, remaining pagan after the Nubas had embraced 
Christianity (6th century) were soon after driven from the Nile 
valley eastwards to the kindred Megabares, Memnons and other 
nomads, who, with the Troglodytes, had from time immemorial 
held the whole steppe region between the Nile and the Red Sea 
from Axum to Egypt. Here their most collective name was 
Bugaitae (BotryaetraQ, as appears from the Axumite inscription, 
whence the forms Buja, Beja, which occur in the oldest Arab 
records, and by which they are still known. 

In the 7th century the Arabs who had conquered Egypt 
penetrated into Lower Nubia, where the two Jawabareh and 
Al-Gharbiya tribes became powerful, and amalgamated with the 
Nubas of that district. Their further progress south was barred 
by the Christian kings of Dongola (q.v.) until the 14th century, 
when the Arabs became masters of the whole region. Still 
later another element was added to the population in the intro- 
duction by the Turkish masters of Egypt of a number of 
Bosnians. These Bosnians (Kalaji as they called themselves) 
settled in the country and intermarried with the Arabs and 
Nubians, their descendants still holding lands between Assuan and 
Derr. Hence it is that the Nubians of this district, fairest of all 
the race, still claim Arab and Osmanli (Bosnian) descent. 

Nevertheless, the Nubian type remains essentially negro, being 
characterized by a very dark complexion, varying from a 
mahogany brown and deep bronze to an almost black shade, with 
tumid lips, large black animated eyes, doli-chocephalic head 
(index 73, 72), hair often woolly or strongly frizzled, and scant 
beard worn under the chin like the figures of the fugitives (Uaua?) 
in the battle-pieces sculptured on the walls of the Egyptian 
temples. At the same time the nose is much larger and the 
zygomatic arches less prominent than in the full-blood negro. 
The Nilotic Nubians are on the whole a strong muscular people, 
essentially agricultural, more warlike and energetic than the 
Egyptians. Many find employment as artisans, small dealers, 
porters and soldiers in Egypt, where they are usually noted for 
their honesty, and frank and cheerful temperament. Since the 
overthrow of the native Christian states all have become Mahom- 
medans, but not of a fanatical type. Although a native of Dongola, 
the mahdi, Mahommed Ahmed, found his chief support, not 
among his countrymen, but among the more recently converted 
Kordofan negroes and the nomad Arabs and Beja. (For ethno- 
logy see also Hamitic Races, Beja, Ababda, Bisharin, 
Hadendoa, &c). 

Language. — Little is known of the language of the ancient Nubians 
or of its connexion, if any, with the language, known as Meroitic, 
of the " Ethiopians " who preceded them. The hieroglyphs and 
inscriptions in Meroitic belong mostly to the first six centuries A.D.; 
the existing Nubian MSS. are medieval and are written chiefly in 
Greek letters, and in form and character resemble Coptic. They are, 
with one exception, written on parchment and contain lives of saints, 
&c, the exception being a legal document. The most noteworthy of 
these MSS. was found near Edfu, in Upper Egypt, early in the 
20th century and purchased for the British Museum in 1908. Euty- 
chius, patriarch of Alexandria about 930, included "Nubi" among 
the six kinds of writing which he mentions as current among the 
Hamitic peoples, and * Nubi " also appears among a list of six 
writings mentioned in an ancient manuscript now in the Berlin 
Museum. 

The modern Nubian tongue, clearly the descendant of the Nubian 
of the MSS., is very sonorous and expressive. Its distinctly negro 
character is betrayed in the complete absence of grammatical gender, 
in its primitive vowel-system and highly-developed process of 
consonantal assimilation, softening all harsh combinations, lastly, 
in the peculiar infix j inserted between the verbal root and the plural 
pronominal object, as in a* tokki-j-ir ~ I shake them. As in Bantu, 
the verb presents a multiplicity of forms, including one present, 
three past'and future tenses, with personal endings complete, passive, 
interrogative, conditional, elective, negative and other forms, each 
with its proper participial inflexions. In Lepsius's grammar the 
verbal paradigm fills altogether 110 pages. 

Of the Nilotic as distinguished from the Kordofan branch of the 
Nuba language there are three principal dialects current from 
Assuan along the Nile southwards to Meroe, as under: — 

1. Northern: Dialect of Bant Kenz or Mattokki, from the first 
cataract to Sebii* and Wadi al-'Arab, probably dating from 
the Diocletian period. 
11. Central : The Mahal or Martsl, from ICorosko to Wadi rjalfa 
(second cataract). Here the natives are called Saidokki, 
in contradistinction to the northern Mattokki. 
III. Southern: Dongolawi, throughout the province of Dongola 
from the second cataract to J. Deja near Meroe, on the 
northern frontier of the Arab district of Dar Shagia. By 
the Mahasi people it is called Biderin Bannid, *' language 
of the poor," or, collectively with the Kenz, Oshkirin 
Bannid, " language of slaves. 
The northern and southern varieties arc closely related to each 
other, differing considerably from the central, which shows more 
marked affinities with the Kordofan Nuba, possibly because the 
Saidokki people are later arrivals from Kordofan. For topography, 
&c. and archaeology, see Sudan § Anglo-Egyptian and Egypt. 

Authorities. — C. R. Lepsius, Nubische Grammatik (Berlin, 1880), 
and Briefe aus Aegypten, Aethiopien, &c. (Berlin, 1852); D. R. 
Maclver, Areika (Oxford, 1909); Nubian Texts, edited by E. A. 
Wallis Budge (British Museum, 1909); F. LI Griffith, " Some old 
Nubian Christian Texts " in Journal of Theological Studies (Julv, 
1909); E. A. Wallis Budge, The Egyptian Sudan (London, 1907); 
J. Ward, Our Sudan, its Pyramids and Progress (London, 1905); 
E. Riippell, Reisen in Nubien, Kordofan, &c. (Frankfort a. M., 
1829); F. Caillaud, Voyage & MSroe (Paris, 1826); L. Reinisch, Die 
Nuba-Sprache (Vienna, 1879); Memoirs of the Soci6t6 khddiviale 
de Geographic, Cairo; J. L. Burckhardt, Travels in Nubia, &c. 
(London, 1819); G. Waddington and B. Ha'nbury, Journal of a Visit 
to some parts of Ethiopia (London, 1822); E. F. Gau, Nubische 
Denkmaler (Stuttgart, 1821). Consult also the bibliography under 
Sudan. 


RUBLE, a province of central Chile, bounded N. by Linares, 
E. by the Argentine Republic, S. by Concepci6n and W. by 
Concepci6n and Maule. Area, 3407 sq. m.; pop. (1895) 152,935. 
The province lies partly in the great central valley of Chile, noted 
for its fine climate and fertility, and partly on the western 
slopes of the Andes. The Itata river, which forms the southern 
boundary, and its principal tributary, the Ruble, form the 
drainage system of the province. Agriculture and grazing are 
the principal industries. Wheat is largely produced, and there 
are vineyards in some localities. Stock-raising is pursued 
chiefly in the east, where the pastures are rich and the water 
supply unfailing. The state railway from Santiago to the southern 
provinces passes through Ruble, from N.N.E. to S.S.W., and sends 
off a branch from Bulnes W. to Jan Tome on the Bay of Con- 
ception. The capital is Chilian, and the only other important 
town is Bulnes, a railway junction and active commercial centre. 
The hot baths of Chilian, in the eastern part of the province on 
the slope of the volcano of that name, about 7000 ft. above sea 
level, are very popular in Chile. 


NUCERIA ALFATERNA (mod. Nocera Inferiore, q.v.), an 
* ancient town of Campania, Italy, in the valley of the Sarnus 
(Sarno), about 10 m. E. of the modern coast line at Torre Annun- 
ziata, and 8 m. E. of Pompeii. In the period before the Roman 
supremacy it appears to have been the chief town in the valley 
of the Sarnus, Herculaneum, Pompeii, Stabiae and Surrentum 
all being dependent upon it. The coins of the town bear the 
head of the river god. It maintained its allegiance to Rome 
till 309 B.C. when it joined the revolted Samnites. In 308 it 
repulsed a Roman attempt to land at the mouth of the Sarnus, 
but in 307 it was besieged and surrendered. It obtained favour- 
able terms, and remained faithful to Rome even after Cannae. 
Hannibal reduced it in 216 by starvation, and destroyed and 
plundered the town. The inhabitants returned when peace was 
restored. Even during the Social War Nuceria remained true to 
Rome, though the dependent towns joined the revolt; after it 
they were formed into independent communities, and Nuceria 
received the territory of Stabiae, which had been destroyed by 
Sulla in 89 B.C., as a compensation. In 73 B.C. it was plundered 
by Spartacus. Of the buildings of the ancient city nothing 
at all is to be seen; but on the hillsides on the S. are remains 
of villas of the Roman period, and here tombs have been 
found. (T. As.) 


NUCLEUS (Lat. for the kernal of a nut, nux, the stone of 
fruit), the central portion of things, round which other parts of 
the same thing or other things collect together. The term is 
particularly applied to the central mass of protoplasm in a plant 
or animal cell (see Cytology). 


NUER, a Nilotic negro people of the upper Nile, dwelling in the 
swampy plains south of Fashoda and at the Bahr-el-Ghazal 
confluence, and having for neighbours the Dinka, whom they 
resemble. They are long-legged and flat-footed, and live, like 
the aquatic birds, on fish, roots and river plants. They tattoo 
tribal marks on the forehead, and the women pierce the upper 
lips. A few Nuer families live on the floating islets of grass and 
reeds brought down by the river in flood. 


NUEVA SAN SALVADOR, or Santa Tecla, the capital of the 
department of La Libertad, Salvador; on the railway between 
San Salvador (10 m. N.) and the Pacific port of La Libertad. 
Pop. (1905) about 18,000. The town was founded in 1854, and 
intended to replace the capital, San Salvador, which was ruined 
by an earthquake in that year but soon afterwards rebuilt. 
Nueva San Salvador is an attractive town with a large and 
growing trade v 


NUEVO LEON, a northern state of Mexico, bounded N., E. 
and S.E. by Tamaulipas, S. and S.W. by San Luis Potosi and 
W. and N. by Coahuila. Pop. (1900) 327,937; area 23,592 
sq. m. Nuevo Le6n lies partly upon the great Mexican plateau 
and partly upon its eastern slopes, the Sierra Madre Oriental 
crossing the state N.W. to S.E. A branch of the Sierra Madre 
extends northward from the vicinity of Salinas, but its elevations 
are low. The average elevation of the Sierra Madre within the 
state is slightly under 5500 ft. The general character of the 
surface is mountainous, though the western and south-western 
sides ate level and dry as in the adjoining state of Coahuila. 
In the N. the general elevation is low, the surface sandy and 
covered with cactus and mesquite growth, and hot, semi-arid 
conditions prevail. The eastern slopes receive more rain and arc 
well clothed with vegetation, but the lower valleys are sub- 
tropical in character and are largely devoted to sugar production. 
The higher elevations have a dry, temperate, healthful climate. 
There are many rivers and streams, notably the Salado, Pesqueria 
and Presas, but none is navigable within the state, though many 
furnish good water power. Agriculture is the principal industry, 
the chief products being sugar, barley, Indian corn and wheat. 
Rum is a by-product of the sugar industry, and " mescal " is 
distilled from the agave. The gathering and preparation of 
" ixtle " fibres from the agave and yucca forms another im- 
portant industry, the fibre being sent to Tampico for export. 
Stock-raising receives considerable attention; there are about a 
score of large cattle ranges, and there is a considerable export 
of live cattle to Texas and to various Mexican states. Consider- 
able progress has been made in manufacturing industries, and 
there are a large number of sugar-mills, cotton factories, woollen 
mills, smelting works and iron and steel works. The state is well 
served with railways, the capital, Monterrey, being one of the 
most important railway centres in northern Mexico. The 
Mexican National line crosses the northern half of the state and 
has constructed a branch from Monterrey to Matamoros, and a 
Belgian line (F. C. de Monterrey al Golfo Mexicano) runs from 
Tampico N.N.W. to Monterrey, and thence westward to Trevifio 
(formerly Venadito) in Coahuila, a station on the Mexican Inter- 
national. The other principal towns are: Linares, or San Felipe 
de Linares (pop. 20,690 in 1900), 112 m. by rail S.E. of the capital 
in a rich agricultural region; Lampazos, or Lampazos de 
Naranjo (7704)) 96 m. by rail N.W. of the capital; Cadereyta 
Jiminez, Garcfa, Santiago and Doctor Arroyo, the last in the 
extreme southern part of the state. 

NUGENT, ROBERT NUGENT, Earl (1702-1788), Irish 
politician and poet, son of Michael Nugent, was born at Carlans- 
town, Co. Westmeath. He was tersely described by Richard 
Glover as " a jovial and voluptuous Irishman who had left 
popery for the Protestant religion, money and widows." His 
change of religion took place at a very early period in life; he 
married in 1736 Anna (d. 1756), daughter of James Craggs, the 
secretary of state, a lady who had already been twice given in 
marriage. His wife's property comprised the borough of St 
Mawes in Cornwall, and Nugent sat for that constituency from 
1741 to 1754, after which date he represented Bristol until 1774, 
when he returned to St Mawes. He was a lord of the treasury 
from 1754 to 1759 and president of the board of trade from 1766 
to 1768. He married in 1757 Elizabeth, dowager-countess of 
Berkeley, who brought him a large fortune. His support of the 
ministry was so useful that he was created in 1767 Viscount 
Clare, and in 1776 Earl Nugent, both Irish peerages. He died on 
the 13th of October 1788. Lord Nugent was the author of some 
poetical productions, several of which are preserved in the second 
volume of Dodsley's Collections (1748). The earldom descended 
by special remainder to the earl's son-in-law, George Nugent 
Temple Grenville, marquess of Buckingham, and so to his 
successors, the dukes of Buckingham and Chandos. 


NUISANCE (through Fr. noisance, nuisance, from Lat. nocere, 
to hurt), that which gives offence or causes annoyance, trouble 
or injury. In English law nuisance is either public or private. 
A public or common nuisance is denned by Sir J. F. Stephen as 
" an act not warranted by law, or an omission to discharge a 
legal duty, which act or omission obstructs or causes incon- 
venience or damage to the public in the exercise of rights common 
to all His Majesty's subjects " (Digest of the Criminal Law, p. 120). 
A common nuisance is punishable as a misdemeanour at common 
law, where no special provision is made by statute. In modern 
times many of the old common law nuisances have been the 
subject of legislation. It is no defence for a master or employer 
that a nuisance is caused by the acts of his servants, if such acts 
are within the scope of their employment, even though such 
acts are done without his knowledge and contrary to his orders. 
Nor is it a defence that the nuisance has been in existence for a 
great length of time, for no lapse of time will legitimate a public 
nuisance. 

A private nuisance is an act or omission which causes incon- 
venience or damage to a private person, and is left to be redressed 
by action. There must be some sensible diminution of these 
rights affecting the value or convenience of the property. " The 
real question in all the cases is the question of fact, whether the 
annoyance is such as materially to interfere with the ordinary 
comfort of human existence " (Lord Romilly in Crump v. 
Lambert, 1867, L.R. 3 Eq. 409). A private nuisance, differing 
in this respect from a public nuisance, may be legalized by un- 
interrupted use for twenty years. It used to be thought that, 
if a man knew there was a nuisance and went and lived near it, 
he could not recover, because, it was said, it is he that goes to 
the nuisance and not the nuisance to him. But this has long 
ceased to be law, as regards both the remedy by damages and 
the remedy by injunction. 

The remedy for a public nuisance is by information, indictment, 
summary procedure or abatement. An information lies in cases 
of great public importance, such as the obstruction of a navigable 
river by piers. In some matters the law allows the party to take 
the remedy into his own hands and to " abate " the nuisance. 
Thus, if a gate be placed across a highway, any person lawfully 
using the highway may remove the obstruction, provided that no 
breach of the peace is caused thereby. The remedy for a private 
nuisance is by injunction, action for damages or abatement. An 
action lies in every case for a private nuisance; it also lies where the 
nuisance is public, provided that the plaintiff can prove that he has 
sustained some special injury. In such a case the civil is in addition 
to the criminal remedy. In abating a private nuisance, care must 
be taken not to do more damage than is necessary for the removal 
of the nuisance. 

In Scotland there is no recognized distinction between public 
ajd private nuisances. The law as to what constitutes a nuisance 
is substantially the same as in England. A list of statutory nuisances 
will be found in the Public Health (Scotland) Act 1867, and amend- 
ing acts. The remedy for nuisance is by interdict or action. 

The American law on the subject is practically the same as the 
English law. 


NUKHA, a town of Russian Caucasia, in the government of 
Eliza vet pol, and previous to 18 19 the capital of the khanate of 
Sheki, lying 57 m. N.E. of the town of Elizavetopol, at the S. 
foot of the main chain of the Caucasus. Pop. (1861) 22,618; 
(1897) 24,811; mainly Tatars, with some Armenians. The 
cupola of the church in the fortress is 2455 ft. above the sea-level, 
in 41 12' 18" N. and 47 12' 7* E. The fortress, a square 
enclosure, erected in 1765, contains the palace, built in 1790 in 
the original Persian style. The leading industry is the breeding 
of silkworms and the spinning of silk. Nukha was a mere 
village down to the middle of the 18th century, when it was 
chosen by Hajji Chelyabi, the founder of the khanate of Sheki, 
as his residence. The Russian occupation dates from 1S07, 
though the annexation was not completed till 1819. 


NULLAH (Hindostani for an arm of the sea, stream or water- 
course), a steep narrow valley. Like the wadi of the Arabs, the 
nullah is characteristic of mountainous or hilly country where 
there is little rainfall. In the drier parts of India, and in many 
parts of Australia there are small steep-sided valleys penetrating 
the hills, clothed with rough brushwood or small trees growing 
in the stony soil. During occasional heavy rains torrents rush 
down the nullahs and quickly disappear. There is little local 
action upon the sides, while the bed is lowered, and consequently 
these valleys are narrow and steep. 


NULLIFICATION, the process of making null or of no effect 
(Lat. nullns, none). In United States history the term is 
applied to the process by which a state either (a) in fact suspended, 
or (&) claimed a constitutional right of suspending, the operation 
of a federal law within its own territory. The doctrine of 
nullification as a constitutional theory was probably never 
held by a majority of the states or of the American people at 
any one time, though hefore i860 most of the states asserted 
or practised it. The belief in nullification was based on the 
theory that the union of the states was a voluntary one, each 
member retaining its sovereignty, though for purposes of con- 
venience delegating certain powers of government to an agent — 
the federal government. The powers of this agent were strictly 
limited by the Constitution, and should it transcend these 
powers the states must interpose to protect their rights. This 
view held that the Supreme Court created by the Constitution 
was not a proper tribunal to decide causes arising beyond the 
Constitution or relating to the nature of the Union, but that 
its jurisdiction was limited to cases arising under the Constitu- 
tion. If the Federal government usurped a right belonging to 
the state, the latter, being a sovereignty, must judge for itself. 
As later perfected by John C. Calhoun (q.v.), the theory of 
nullification required a practice as follows. A state aggrieved 
by a law of the Federal cpngress might, in constituent convention, 
suspend the operation of the objectionable law, and report its 
action to the other states. If three-fourths of them should 
decide that the law in question was not unconstitutional, then 
in effect it became ratified (see United States Constitution, 
art. v.). The dissatisfied state must then submit or must draw 
out of the union by the act of secession (see Secession, and 
Confederate States). This theory of the right of nullification 
was considered by those who held it to be in accord with the " 
principles laid down in the Constitution. It must be distin- 
guished from secession, which was considered a sovereign right, 
one above the Constitution; yet nullification presumed the 
sovereignty of the state. 

The earliest assertions of the doctrine of nullification are 
found in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions of 1 798-1 799, 
written respectively by Thomas Jefferson and James Maplison 
in protest against the Alien and Sedition Acts of Congress. 
Nullification was first practised in 1809 by Pennsylvania, the 
governor ordering out the state troops to resist the execution 
of a decree of a Federal court. In the New England states, 
1809-1815, the United States laws relating to embargo, non- 
intercourse and army enlistments were nullified by state action. 
From 1 825-1829 the state of Georgia forcibly prevented the 
execution of Federal laws and court decrees relating to the 
Indians within her borders and in Alabama, 1832-1835, there 
was a similar nullification. The only example of nullification 
in which theory and practice coincided was the nullification 
in 1832 by South Carolina of the Federal tariff laws. In this 
the state acted upon the theory outlined above which was 
perfected by Calhoun. In the last decade before the Civil War 
fourteen of the Northern states in the so-called " Personal 
Liberty laws " nullified the Federal statutes relating to slaves 
and slavery by making it a crime for their citizens to obey these 
laws and by setting the state administration against the Federal 
officials. Since the Reconstruction the Southern states have 
in practice effected a nullification of the Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution providing for negro 
suffrage. 

See John C. Calhoun, Works, vols. i. and vi. (New York, 1853- 
J 855); p. F. Houston, Critical Study of Nullification in South 
Carolina (New York, 1897) ; C. W. Loring, Nullification and Secession 
(New York, 1893); E. P. Powell, Nullification and Secession in the 
Untied States (New York, 1897); and U. B. Phillips, Georgia and 
States Rights (Washington, 1902). (W. L. F.) 


NUMANTIA, an ancient hill fortress in northern Spain, in 
the province of Soria (Old Castile), overhanging the village of 
Garray, near the town of Soria, on the upper Douro. Here, 
on a small isolated high plateau in the middle of the valley, 
was the stronghold which played the principal part in a famous 
struggle between the conquering Romans and the native Spaniards 
during the years 154-133 B.C. Numantia was especially con- 
cerned in the latter part of this war from 144 onwards. It 
was several times unsuccessfully besieged. Once the Roman 
general Hostilius Mancinus with his whole army was compelled 
to surrender (137). Finally, Scipio Aemilianus, Rome's first 
and only general in that age, with some 60,000 men drew round 
the town 6 m. of continuous entrenchments with seven camps 
at intervals. After 15 months (134-133) he reduced by hunger 
the 6000-8000 Numantine soldiers, much as Caesar afterwards 
reduced Alesia in Gaul. The result was regarded as a glorious 
victory, and in Roman literature the fall of Numantia was 
placed beside the fall of Carthage (149 B.C.). In truth, the 
maintenance in effective condition of so large a Roman force 
in so remote and difficult a region was in itself a real achievement 
and such as at that time no one but Scipio could have performed. 
He redeemed by organized strategy the vacillations and follies 
of statesmen who had sat at home and sent out inadequate 
expeditions or incompetent commanders. The site was, under 
the Roman Empire, occupied by a Roman town called Numantia, ' 
and the Itinerary tells of a Roman road which ran past it. It 
is to-day a " Monumento Nacional " of Spain, and has yielded 
remarkable discoveries to the skilful excavations of Dr Schulten 
(1905-1910), who has traced the Celtiberian town, the lines 
of Scipio and several other Roman camps dating from the 
Numantine Wars. (F. J. H.) 


NUMA POMPILIUS, second legendary king of Rome (715- 
672 B.C.), was a Sabine, a native of Cures, and his wife was 
the daughter of Titus Tatius, the Sabine colleague of Romulus. 
He was elected by the Roman people at the close of a year's 
interregnum, during which the sovereignty had been exercised 
by the members of the senate in rotation. Nearly all the early 
religious institutions of Rome were attributed to him. He set 
up the worhip of Terminus (the god of landmarks), appointed 
the festival of Fides (Faith), built the temple of Janus, reorgan- 
ized the calendar and fixed days of business and holiday. He 
instituted the flamens (sacred priests) of Jupiter, Mars and 
Quirinus; the virgins of Vesta, to keep the sacred fire burning 
on the hearth of the city; the Salii, to guard the shield that 
fell from heaven; the pontifices and augurs, to arrange the 
rites and interpret the will of the gods; he also divided the 
handicraftsmen into nine gilds. He derived his inspiration from 
his wife, the nymph Egeria, whom he used to meet by night in 
her sacred grove. After a long and peaceful reign, during which 
the gates of Janus were closed, Numa died and was succeeded 
by the warlike Tullus Hostilius. Livy (xl. 29) tells a curious 
story of two stone chests, bearing inscriptions in Greek and 
Latin, which were found at the foot of the Janiculum (181 B.C.), 
one purporting to contain the body of Numa and the other his 
books. The first when opened was found to be empty, but the 
second contained fourteen books relating to philosophy and 
pontifical law, which were publicly burned as tending to under- 
mine the established religion. 

No single legislator can really be considered responsible for 
all the institutions ascribed to Numa; they are essentially 
Italian, and older than Rome itself. Even Roman tradition 
itself wavers; e.g. the fetiales are variously attributed to Tullus 
Hostilius and Ancus Marcius. The supposed law-books, which 
were to all "appearance new when discovered, were clearly 
forgeries. 

See Livy i. 18-21; Plutarch, Numa; Dion. Halic. ii. 58-76; 
Cicero, De republica, ii. 13-15. For criticism: Schwegler, Romische 
Geschichte, bk. xi.; Sir G. Corncwall Lewis, Credibility of early 
Roman History, ch. xi. ; W. Ihne, Hist, of Rome, i. ; E. Pais, Storia at 
Roma, i. (1898^, where Numa is identified with Titus Tatius and made 
out to be a river god, Numicius, closely connected with Aeneas; 
J. B. Carter, The Religion of Numa (1906); O. Gilbert, Geschichte 
und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum (1883-1885) ; and Rome : 
Ancient History. * 


NUMBER 1 (through Fr. nombre, from Lat. numerus; from 
a root seen in Gr. vkyLtiv to distribute), a word generally ex- 
pressive of quantity, the fundamental meaning of which leads 
•on analysis to some of the most difficult problems of higher 
mathematics. 

1. The most elementary process of thought involves a distinc- 
tion within an identity — the A and the not-A within the sphere 
throughout which these terms are intelligible. Again A may be 
a generic quality found in different modes Aa, Ab, Ac, &c; for 
instance, colour in the modes, red, green, blue and so on. Thus 
the notions of " one," " two," and the vague " many " are 
fundamental, and must have impressed themselves on the human 
mind at a very early period: evidence of this is found in the 
grammatical distinction of singular, dual and plural which 
occurs in ancient languages of widely different races. A more 
definite idea of number seems to have been gradually acquired 
by realizing the equivalence, as regards plurality, of different 
concrete groups, such as the fingers of the right hand and those 
of the left. This led to the invention of a set of names which in 
the first instance did not suggest a numerical system, but denoted 
certain recognized forms of plurality, just as blue, red, green, &c, 
denote recognized forms of colour. Eventually the conception of 
the series of natural numbers became sufficiently clear to lead 
to a systematic terminology, and the science of arithmetic was 
thus rendered possible. But it is only in quite recent times that 
the notion of number has been submitted to a searching critical 

	^ee also Numeral. 

analysis: it is, in fact, one of the most characteristic results of 
modern mathematical research that the term number has been 
made at once more precise and more extensive. 

2. Aggregates (also called manifolds or sets). — Let us assume the 
possibility of constructing or contemplating a permanent system 
of things such that (1) the system includes all objects to which 
a certain definite quality belongs; (2) no object without this 
quality belongs to the system; (3) each object of the system is 
permanently recognizable as the same thing, and as distinct 
from all other objects of the system. Such a collection is called 
an aggregate: the separate objects belonging to it aie called its 
elements. An aggregate may consist of a single element. 

It is further assumed that we can select, by a definite process, 
one or more elements of any aggregate A at pleasure: these 
form another aggregate B. If any element of A remains un- 
selected, B is said to be a part of A (in symbols, B < A) : if not, 
B is identical with A. Every element of A is a part of A. If 
B<A and C<B, then C<A. 

When a correspondence can be established between two 
aggregates A and B in such a way that to every element of A 
corresponds one and only one element of B, and conversely, A 
and B are said to be equivalent, or to have the same power (or 
potency); in symbols, A<^B. If A<^B and BcnC, then AwC. 
It is possible for an aggregate to be equivalent to a part of 
itself: the aggregate is then said to be infinite. As an example, 
the aggregates 2, 4, 6, ... 2ft, &c, and 1, 2, 3, . . . n, &c, are 
equivalent, but the first is only a part of the second. 

3. Order. — Suppose that when any two elements a, b of an 
aggregate A are taken there can be established, by a definite 
criterion, one or other of two alternative relations, symbolized 
by a<b and a>b, subject to the following conditions: — (1) If 
a>b y then b<a t and if a<b, then b>a; (2) If a>b and b>c, 
then a>c. In this case the criterion is said to arrange the 
aggregate in order. An aggregate which can be arranged in order 
may be called ordinable. An ordinable aggregate may, in general, 
by the application of different criteria, be arranged in order in a 
variety of ways. According as a<b or a>b we shall speak of a 
as anterior or posterior to b. These terms are chosen merely for 
convenience, and must not be taken to imply any meaning 
except what is involved in the definitions of the signs > and < for 
the particular criterion in question. The consideration of a 
succession of events in time will help to show that the assumptions 
made are not self-contradictory. An aggregate arranged in 
order by a definite criterion will be called an ordered aggregate. 
Let a, b be any two elements of an ordered aggregate, and 
suppose a<b. All the elements c (if any) such that a<c<b are 
said to fall within the interval (a, b). If an element b, posterior 
to a, can be found so that no element falls within the interval 
(a, b) , then a is said to be isolated from all subsequent elements, 
and b is said to be the element next after a. So if b'<a, and no 
element falls within the interval (&', a), then a is isolated from all 
preceding elements, and b f is the element next before a. As 
will be seen presently, for any assigned element a } either, neither, 
or both of these cases may occur. 

An aggregate A is said to be well-ordered (or normally ordered) 
when, in addition to being ordered, it has the following pro- 
perties: (1) A has a first or lowest element a which is anterior 
to all the rest; (2) if B is any part of A, then B has a first 
element. It follows from this that every part of a well-ordered 
aggregate is itself well-ordered. A well-ordered aggregate may 
or may not have a last element. 

Two ordered aggregates A, B are said to be similar (A.SC.B) when 
a one-one correspondence can be set up between their elements 
in such a way that if b, b' are the elements of B which correspond 
to any two elements a } a' of A, then b>b' or b<b f according as 
a>a' 'or a<a r . For example, (1,3, 5, . . . ^(2,4,6,. . . ), because 
we can make the even number 2« correspond to the odd 
number (2«— 1) and conversely. 

Similar ordered aggregates are said to have the same order-type. 
Any definite order-type is said to be the ordinal number of every 
aggregate arranged according to that type. This somewhat 
vague definition will become clearer as we proceed. 

4. The Natural Scale. — Let a be any element of a well-ordered 
aggregate A. Then all the elements posterior to a form an 
aggregate A', which is a part of A and, by definition, has a first 
element a'. This element a? is different from a, and immediately 
succeeds it in the order of A. (It may happen, of course, that 
a! does not exist; in this case a is the last element of A.) Thus 
in a well-ordered aggregate every element except the last (if 
there be a last element) is succeeded by a definite next element. 
The ingenuity of man has developed a symbolism by means of 
which every symbol is associated with a definite next succeeding 
symbol, and in this way we have a set of visible or audible signs 
1, 2, 3, &c. (or their verbal equivalents), representing an aggregate 
in which (1) there is a definite order, (2) there is a first term, 
(3) each term has one next following, and consequently there is 
no last term. Counting a set of objects means associating them 
in order with the first and subsequent members of this con- 
ventional aggregate. The process of counting may lead to three 
diffeient results: (r) the set of objects may be finite in number, 
so that they are associated with a part of the conventional aggre- 
gate which has a last term; (2) the set of objects may have the 
same power as the conventional aggregate; (3) the set of objects 
may have a higher power than the conventional aggregate. 
Examples of (2) and (3) will be found further on. The order-type 
of 1, 2, 3, &c, and of similar aggregates will be denoted byco; 
this is the first and simplest member of a set of transfinite ordinal 
numbers to be considered later on. Any finite number such as 
3 is used ordinally as representing the order-type of 1, 2, 3 or 
any similar aggregate, and cardinally as representing the power 
of 1, 2, 3 or any equivalent aggregate. For reasons that will 
appear, co is only used in an ordinal sense. The aggregate 
1, 2, 3, &c, in any of its written or spoken forms, may be called 
the natural scale, and denoted by N. It has already been shown 
that N is infinite: this appears in a more elementary way from 
the fact that (1. 2, 3, 4,. . .)<£(2, 3, 4, 5,. . . ), where each 
element of N is made to correspond with the next following. 
Any aggregate which is equivalent to the natural scale or a part 
thereof is said to be countable. 

5. Arithmetical Operations. — When the natural scale N has 
once been obtained it is comparatively easy, although it requires 
a long process of induction, to define the arithmetical operations 
of addition, multiplication and involution, as applied to natural 
numbers. It can be proved that these operations are free 
from ambiguity and obey certain formal laws of commutation, 
&c, which will not be discussed here. Each of the three direct 
operations leads to an inverse problem which cannot be solved 
except under certain implied conditions. Let a, b denote any 
two assigned natural numbers: then it is required to find 
natural numbers, x, y, z such that 

	a = b-\~x t a = by } a=£ 

respectively. The solutions, when they exist, are perfectly 
definite, and may be denoted by a— b, a/b and V a; but they 
are only possible in the first case when a>b, in the second when 
a is a multiple of b, and in the third when a is a perfect 6th 
power. It is found to be possible, by the construction of certain 
elements, called respectively negative, fractional and irrational • 
numbers, and zero, to remove all these restrictions. 

6. There are certain properties, common to the aggregates 
with which we have next to deal, analogous to those possessed 
by the natural scale, and consequently justifying us in applying 
the term number to any one of their elements. They are stated 
here, once for all, to avoid repetition; the verification, in each 
case, will be, for the most part, left to the reader. Each of the 
aggregates in question (A, suppose) is an ordered aggregate. 
If a, ft are any two elements of A, they may be combined by two 
definite operations, represented by + and X, so as to produce 
two definite elements of A represented by a+£ and aXjS (or 
a0); these operations obey the formal laws satisfied by those of 
addition and multiplication. The aggregate A contains one 
(and only one) element 1, such that if a is any element of A 
(t included), then a+t>a, and <u=a. Thus A contains the 
elements t, t+i, t+t+i, &c, or, as we may write them, 1, 21, 
Sh . . .«*. . .such that mi+m=(m+n)t and mtXnt=mm; 

also i<2t<3t . . . We may express this by saying that A 
contains an image of the natural scale. The clement denoted 
by 1 may be called the ground element of A. 

7. Negative Numbers. — Let any two natural numbers a, b be 
selected in a definite order a, b (to be distinguished from b, a, in 
which the order is reversed). In this way we obtain from N an 
aggregate of symbols (a, b) which we shall call couples, or more 
precisely, if necessary, polar couples. This new aggregate may 
be arranged in order by means of the following rules: — 

Two couples (a, b), (a f , b f ) are said to be equal if a+b r = a f +b. 
In other words (a, b), (a', b f ) are then taken to be equivalent 
symbols for the same thing. 

If a+&'>a'+0, we write (a, &)>(a', b')\ and if a+b'<a'+b, 
we write (a, b)<(a', b'). 

The rules for the addition and multiplication of couples are: 

	(a, 6)+<a' t &') = (a+a', b+V) 

	(a, b)X(a' t b') = (aa'+bb' t ab'+a'b). 

The aggregate thus defined will be denoted by N; it may be 
called the scale of relative integers. 

If t denotes (2, 1) or any equivalent couple, (a, 6)+t= 
(a+2, b+i) > (a, b) and (a, b) Xt= (2a+b, a+20) = (a, b). Hence 
1 is the ground element of N. By definition, 21=1+1 = (4, 2) = 
(3, 1); and hence by induction mt=(?w+i, 1), where m is any 
natural integer. Conversely every couple (a, b) in which a>b 
can be expressed by the symbol (a— b)i. In the same way, every 
couple (a, b) in which b>a can be expressed in the form (6— a)t', 
where t' = (i, 2). 

8. It follows as a formal consequence of the definitions that 
i+i' = (2, i)+(i, 2) = (3, 3) = (r, 1). It is convenient to denote 
(1, 1) and its equivalent symbols by o, because 

	(a, 6)+(i, i)-(a+i t b+i)-(a t b) 
	(a, 6)X(i» 1) = (a+&, a+»-(i.i); 

hence i+t'=o, and we can represent N by the scheme — 

	. . . 31', 2l', 1', o, I, 2i, 31 . . . 

in which each element is obtained from the next before it by the 
addition of 1. With this notation the rules of operation may be 
written (m, n, denoting natural numbers) — 

	mi+wi = (m+n)t mi'-hwi' = (m-f-n)i' 
	mi4-«i' = (m — n)iif m>n 
	= (n— m)i' m<n 
	mi X m = mm, mi' Xm' = mm, mi X »i' —mm', 

with the special rules for zero, that if a is any element of N, 

	a+0 = o, oXO = 0. 

To each element, a, of N corresponds a definite element a! such 
that a+a' = o; if a=o, then a' = o, but in every other case a, a' 
are different and may be denoted by mi, mi*. The natural 
number m is called the absolute value of mi and mi'. 

9. If a, p are any two elements of N, the equation £+j8=a 
is satisfied by putting £ =a+j8'. Thus the symbol a— j8 is always 
interpretable as a+j8', and we may say that within N subtraction 
is always possible; it is easily proved to be also free from 
ambiguity. On the other hand, a/p is intelligible only if the 
absolute value of a is a multiple of the absolute value of $. 

The aggregate N has no first element and no last element. 
At the same time it is countable, as we see, for instance, by 
associating the elements o, at, fa' with the natural numbers 
1, 2a, 26+1 respectively, thus — 

	(N) 1,2,3,4,5,6, ... 

	(N) 0,l,i',2l, 2if,3t... 

It is usual to write +a (or simply a) for at and —a for at'; 
that this should be possible without leading to confusion or 
ambiguity is certainly remarkable. 

10. Fractional Numbers. — We will now derive from N a 
different aggregate of couples [a, b] subject to the following rules: 

The symbols [a, b], [a', 61, are equivalent if ab f —a'b. Accord- 
ing as ab f is greater or less than a'b we regard [a, b] as being greater 
or less than [a', b'\. The formulae for addition and multiplication 
are

	[a, 6] -Ha', 61 =[a&'+a'&, W\ 
	[a, b]x\a f , b') = laa f , W], 

All the couples [a, a] are equivalent to [1, 1], and if we denote 
this by v we have [a, b]+v = [a+b, b]>[a, b], [a, b]Xv = [a, b], 
so that v is the ground element of the new aggregate. 

Again 2v = v+v = (2, 1), and by induction mv=[m, 1]. More- 
over, if a is a multiple of b, say mb, we may denote [a, b] by tnv. 

11. The new aggregate of couples will be denoted by R. It 
differs from N and N in one very important respect, namely, 
that when its elements are arranged in order of magnitude (that 
is to say, by the rule above given) they are not isolated from 
each other. In fact if [a, b] = a, and [a', b'] = a', the element 
[a+a f , b+b'] lies between a and a'; hence it follows that between 
any two different elements of R we can find as many other 
elements as we please. This property is expressed by saying 
that R is in close order when its elements are arranged in order 
of magnitude. Strange as it appears at first sight, R is a count- 
able aggregate; a theorem first proved by G. Cantor. To see 
this, observe that every element of R may be represented by a 
" reduced " couple [a, b], in which a, b are prime to each other. 
If [a, b] t [c, d\ are any two reduced couples, we will agree that 
[a, b] is anterior to [c, d\ if either (1) a+b<c+d f or (2) a+& = 
c-\-d, but a<c. This gives a new criterion by which all the 
elements of R can be arranged in the succession 

	[1, il, [1, 2], [2, 1], [i, 3], [3, 1 J, [i, 4], [2, 3], [3, 2], [4, 1]. . . 

which is similar to the natural scale. 

The aggregate R, arranged in order of magnitude, agrees with 
N in having no least and no greatest element; for if a denotes 
any element [a, 6], then [20-1, 2b]<a, while [20+1, 26] >a. 

12. The division of one element of R by another is always 
possible; for by definition 

	[c, d\X[ad f be] = [acd t bcd\ =[a f 6], 

and consequently [a, 6]-^[c, d\ is always interpretable as [ad, be]. 
As a particular case [m, i]-§-[«, I \ = l fn t W L so that every element 
of R is expressible m one of the forms wv, mv/nv. It is usual to 
omit the symbol v altogether, and to represent the element 
[m, n] by mjn, whether m is a multiple of n or not. Moreover, 
m/i is written m, which may be done without confusion, because 
w/i+«/i = (w+w)/i, and m/iXw/i=»m/i, by the rules given 
above. 

13. Within the aggregate R subtraction is not always practic- 
able; but^this limitation may be removed by constructing an 
aggregate R related to R in the same way as N to N. This may 
be done in two ways which lead to equivalent results. We may 
either form symbols of the type (a,jS), where a, jS denote elements 
of R, and apply the rules of § 7 ; or elsejorm symbols of the type 
[a, |3], where a, |3 denote elements of N, and apply the rules of 
§10. The final result is that R contains a zero element, o, a 
ground element v, an element 1/ such that u-|-i/ = o, and a set 
of elements representable by the symbols (mjn)v, (m/n)v\ In 
this notation the rules of operation are 
m _ s m r { mn'+m r n \ m ,,«' , { mn'+m'n \ ,, 
m , m' , mn'-m'n m m'n-mri 
TTv+ZP""** — w — p » or 
n n tin 
v , as mn>or<m n; 
m .,m 
— uX — ri 
n n 
mm 
~ nn' 
m . m 
— V-i rU=~ , 
n n mn 
m ,.,m f 
n ti 
tn , ,tn r , 
= n v ^* v > 
m w w 
n n 
m 
n v ~ 
n 
mm . 
mn r t m . m r 
m n ft n 
a-/3 = a-f/3' t where j9-h/3' = 
a-ho = a, aXO = 0. 
o; 

Here a and |3 denote any two elements of R. If = (w/m)u, 
thenjS'=(m/«K> andi£j8 = (i»/»)u', then p'=(m/n)v. If = o, 
thenjS^o. _ _ 

14. When R is constructed by means of couples taken from N, 
we must put [mi, m] = bm f t «t'] = (w/«)y, [mt JL m f ] = [mt , 9 m] = 
(mln)v f , and [o, a] = o, if a is any element of N except o. The 
symbols [o, o] and [a, o] are inadmissible; the first because it 
satisfies the definition of equality (§ 10) with every symbol 
[a, j8], and is therefore indeterminate; the second because, 
according to the rule of addition, 

	K o] +M = [<u. o] = [a, o], 

	which is inconsistent with f+i»f. 

In the same way, if o denotes the zero element of R, and J any 
other element, the symbol 0/0 is indeterminate, and £/o in- 
admissible, because, by the formal rules of operation, f/o+i;=f/o, 
which conflicts with the definition of the ground element v. 

It is usual to write +— (or simply —J for ^-u, and -— for — v\ 

Each of these elements is said to have the_absolute value m/w. 
The criterion for arranging the elements of R in order of magni- 
tude is that, if J, t} are any two elements of it, £>tj when £— tj 
is positive; that is to say, when it can be expressed in the 
form (tn/n)v. 

15. The aggregate R is very important, because it is the 
simplest type of a field of rationality, or corpus. An algebraic 
corpus is an aggregate, such that its elements are representable 
by symbols a, )3, &c, which can be combined according to the 
laws of ordinary algebra; every algebraic expression obtained 
by combining a finite number of symbols, by means of a finite 
chain of rational operations, being capable of interpretation as 
representing a definite element of the aggregate, with the single 
exception that division by zero is inadmissible. Since, by the 
laws of algebra, a-a=o, and aja—i, every algebraic field con- 
tains R, or, more properly, an aggregate which is an image of R. 

16. Irrational Numbers. — Let a denote any element of R; 
then a and all lesser elements form an aggregate, A say; the 
remaining elements form another aggregate A^ which we shall 
call complementary to A, and wemay write R = A+A'. Now 
the essence of this separation of R into the parts A and A' may 
be expressed without any reference to a as follows: — 

I. The aggregates A, A' are complementary^ that is, their 
elements, taken together, make up the whole of R. 

II. Every element of A is less than every element of A'. 

III. The aggregate A' has no least element. (This condition 
is artificial, but saves ^distinction of cases in what follows.) 

Every separation R=A+A' which satisfies these conditions 
is called a cut (or section), and will be denoted by (A, A 7 ). We 
have seen that every rational number a can be associated with 
a cut. Conversely, every cut (A, A) in which A has a last element 
a is perfectly definite, and specifies a without ambiguity. But 
there are other cuts in which A has no last element. For instance, 
all the elements (a) of R such that either a^o, or else a> o and 
a 2 <2, form an aggregate A, while those for which a>o and 
a 2 >2, form the complementary aggregate A'. This separation 
is a cut in which A has no last element; because if p/q is any 
positive element of A, the element (3£+4?)/(2£+3?) exceeds 
p/q, and also belongs to A. Every cut of this kind is said to define 
an irrational number. The justification of this is contained in 
the following propositions: — 

(1) A cut is a definite concept, and the assemblage of cuts 
is an aggregate according to definition; the generic quality of 
the aggregate being the separation of R into two complementary 
parts, without altering the order of its elements. 

(2) The aggregate of cuts may be arranged in order by the rule 
that (A, A') < (B, B') if A is a part of B. 

(3) This criterion of arrangement preserves the order of 
magnitude of all rational numbers. 

(4) Cuts may be combined according to the laws of algebra, 
and, when the cuts so combined are all rational, the results are 
in agreement with those derived from the rational theory. 

As a partial illustration of proposition (4) let (A, A')t (B, B') be 
any two cuts; and let C be the aggregate whose elements are ob- 
tained by forming all the values of a^-p t where a' is any element of 
A' and 0' is any element of B'. Then if C is the complement of C, 
it can be proved that (C t C') is a cut; this is said to be the sum of 
(A, A') and (B, B'). The difference, product and quotient of two cuts 
may be defined in a similar way. If n denotes the irrational cut 
chosen above for purposes of illustration, we shall have n 2 =^(C, C) 
where C comprises all the numbers a'0' obtained by multiplying any 
two elements, a', ft' which are rational and positive, and such that 
a' 2 >2, /8' 2 >2. Since a /2 /3 /J >4 it follows that a'/3' is positiveand 
greater than 2; it can be proved conversely that every rational 
number which is greater than 2 can be expressed in the form a'0'. 
Hence n 2 =2, so that the cut n actually gives a real arithmetical 
meaning to the positive root of the equation x* =2 ; in other words we 
may say that n defines the irrational number V 2 . The theory of cuts, 
in fact, provides a logical basis for the treatment of all finite 
numerical irrationalities, and enables us to justify all arithmetical 
operations involving the use of such quantities. 

17. Since the aggregate of cuts (7X say) has an order of 
magnitude, we may construct cuts in this aggregate. Thus 
if a is any element of 7X t and & is the aggregate which consists 
of a and all anterior elements of H, we may write H =$£+&', 
and (St, SI') is a cut in which SI has a last element a. It is a 
remarkable fact that no other kind of cut in 7X is possible; in 
other words, every conceivable cut in 7X is defined by one of its own 
elements. This is expressed by saying that 7X is a continuous 
aggregate, and XI itself is referred to as the numerical continuum 
of real numbers. The property of continuity must be carefully 
distinguished from that of close order (§ n); a continuous 
aggregate is necessarily in close order, but the converse is not 
always true. The aggregate 7X is not countable. 

18. Another way of treating irrationals is by means of 
sequences. A sequence is an unlimited succession of rational 
numbers

	0li ^ G . 5 . . . a,, a* + i . . . 
	(in order-type co)

the elements of which can be assigned by a 
definite rule, such that when any rational number e, however 
small, has been fixed, it is possible to find an integer m, so that 
for all positive integral values of n the absolute value of 
(a m + n — dm) is less than e. Under these conditions the sequence 
may be taken to represent a definite number, which is, in fact, 
the limit of a m when m increases without limit. Every rational 
number a can be expressed as a sequence in the form (a, a, a, . . .), 
but this is only one of an infinite! variety of such representations, 
for instance — 

	1 -(-9. '99, -999, • • ■) = (5. J. I ^r • • • ) 

and so on. The essential thing is that we have a mode of re- 
presentation which can be applied to rational and irrational 
numbers alike, and provides a very convenient symbolism to 
express the results of arithmetical operations. Thus the rules 
for the sum and product of two sequences are given by the 
formulae 

	fai, a*, ai, . . .) + (&i, fat &s, . . .) = (ai-f fa t a^+fa, C1+&3 . . .) 
	(ai, a 3 , a 3 , . . . )X(&i, fa, fa, . . .) =(ai&i, a^fa, a*fa . . .) 

from which the rules for subtraction and division may be at once 
inferred. It has been proved that the method of sequences is 
ultimately equivalent to that of cuts. The advantage of the 
former lies in its convenient notation, that of the latter in giving 
a clear definition of an irrational number without having recourse 
to the notion of a limit. 

19. Complex Numbers. — If a is an assigned number, rational 
or irrational, and n a natural number, it can be proved that there 
is a real number satisfying the equation x n = a, except when n 
is even and a is negative: in this case the equation is not satisfied 
by any real number whatever. To remove the difficulty we 
construct an aggregate of polar couples \x, y), where x t y are any 
two real numbers, and define the addition and multiplication 
of such couples by the rules 

	I*, yl+l*'. /} = (*+*'. y-\-y j; • 
	{*. y)X\x', y , }=[xx'—y? t xf+x'y). 

We also agree that {x, y}<{x\ y'), if x<x* or if x — x f and 
y<y'. It follows that the aggregate has the ground element 
{1, o}, which we may denote by<r; and that, if we write r for the 
element {0,1}, t 3 = {-i, o) = -<r. 

Whenever m, n are rational, \m t w}=w<r+«r, and we are 
thus justified in writing, if we like,x<r+yr for {x, y) in all circum- 
stances. A further simplification is gained by writing x instead 
of x<j, and regarding r as a symbol which is such that t 2 = — 1, 
but in other respects obeys the ordinary laws of operation. It 
is usual to write i instead of r; we thus have an aggregate 3 
of complex numbers x+yi. In this aggregate, which includes 
the real continuum as part of itself, not only the four rational 
operations (excluding division by {o, o), the zero element), but 
also the extraction of roots, may be effected without any restric- 
tion. Moreover (as first proved by Gauss and Cauchy), if 
a 0) Gi, . : . a« are any assigned real or complex numbers, the 
equation a * , +tfi«*- | + . . . +a»_i2+a» =0, 
is always satisfied by precisely n real or complex values of 2, with 
a proper convention as to multiple roots. Thus any algebraic 
function of any finite number of elements of 3 is also contained 
in 3, which is, in this sense, a closed arithmetical field, just as 
H is when we restrict ourselves to rational operations. The 
power of 3 is the same as that of 7X. 

20. Transfinite Numbers. — The theory of these numbers is 
quite recent, and mainly due to G. Cantor. The simplest of 
them, co, has been already defined (§ 4) as the order-type of the 
natural scale. Now there is no logical difficulty in constructing 
a scheme

	Uu «,,„,...[ Vu 

indicating a well-ordered aggregate of type co immediately 
followed by a distinct element v 1 : for example, we may think 
of all positive odd integers arranged in ascending order of 
magnitude and then think of the even number 2. A scheme of 
this kind is said to be of order-type (co+i); and it will be 
convenient to speak of (co+i) as the index of the scheme. 
Similarly we may form arrangements corresponding to the 
indices 

	w+2, w+3 

The scheme 

	I v u V it Vi . . 
	■ . I . . . I «»!, Umi . . • I 

where n is any positive integer. 

	Ml, M 2 , Mj . . 

is associated with co+co = 2co; 

	Mil, Mij, M13 . . . I M31, M22, M33 . 

with co, co or co 2 ; and so on. Thus we may construct arrange- 
ments of aggregates corresponding to any index of the form 

	0(w)=aw*-f&w'*- 1 4- ■ • ■ +&o-M, 

where n f a, b f . . . I are all positive integers. 

We are thus led to the construction of a scheme of symbols — 

I. 
II. 
III. 

	1, 2, 3, . . . 
	2w, 2&>+I, 
	w-f-tt, . , 
	. . 2w+n, 
	f(a) f £(w) + I, • • • *(w)+tt, . 
	w w , u" + l, . . . w"-fn, . . . 

The symbols <£(co) form a countable aggregate: so that we 
may, if we like (and in various ways), arrange the rows of block 
(II.) in a scheme of type co: we thus have each element a suc- 
ceeded in its row by (a-f 1), and the row containing <£(co) succeeded 
by a definite next row. The same process may be applied to 
(III.), and we can form additional blocks (IV.), (V.), &c, with 
first elements co 4 =co wW * co 5 = co W4 ' &c. All the symbols in which 
co occurs are called transfinite ordinal numbers. 

21. The index of a finite set is a definite integer however the 
set may be arranged; we may take this index as also denoting 
the power of the set, and call it the number of things in the set. 
But the index of an infinite ordinable set depends upon the way 
in which its elements are arranged; for instance, ind. (1, 2, 3, 
. . . ) = co, but ind. (1, 3, 5, . . . | 2, 4, 6, . . .) = 2co. Or, 
to take another example, the scheme — 

	1.3. 5, . • • (2»-i) . . 
	2, 6, 10, ... 2 (2H — i) 
	3» 2 m . 5, 
	2 m (2W — i) 

where each row is supposed to follow the one above it, gives a 
permutation of (1, 2, 3, . . . ), by which its index is changed 
from co to co 2 . It has been proved that there is a permutation 
of the natural scale, of which the index is 0(co), any assigned 
element of (II.); and that, if the index of any ordered aggregate 
is 0(co), the aggregate is countable. Thus the power of all 
aggregates which can be associated with indices of the class (II.) 
is the same as that of the natural scale; this power may be 
denoted by a. Since a is associated with all aggregates of a 
particular power, independently of the arrangement of their 
elements, it is analogous to the integers, i, 2, 3, &c., when used to 
denote powers of finite aggregates; for this reason it is called the 
least transfinite cardinal number. 

22. There are aggregates which have a power greater than 
a: for instance, the arithmetical continuum of positive real 
numbers, the power of which is denoted by c. Another one is 
the aggregate of all those order-types which (like those in II. 
above) are the indices of aggregates of power a. The power of 
this aggregate is denoted by *V According to Cantor's theory 
it is the transfinite cardinal number next superior to a, which for 
the sake of uniformity is also denoted by M . It has been con- 
jectured that 
= c, but this has neither been verified nor 
disproved. The discussion of the aleph-numbers is still in a 
Controversial stage (November 1907) and the points in debate 
cannot be entered upon here. 

23. Transfinite numbers, both ordinal and cardinal, may 
be combined by operations which are so far analogous to those 
of ordinary arithmetic that it is convenient to denote them by 
the same symbols. But the laws of operation are not entirely 
the same; for instance, 2co and C02 have different meanings: 
the first has been explained, the second is the index of the 
scheme (aih \ a 2 h \ a$bz | . . . | a n b « | . . . ) or any similar 
arrangement. Again if n is any positive integer, na = a n = a. 
It should also be observed that according to Cantor's principles 
of construction every ordinal number is succeeded by a definite 
next one; but that there are definite ordinal numbers (e.g. 
WjW 1 ) which have no ordinal immediately preceding them. 

24. Theory of Numbers. — The theory of numbers is that 
branch of mathematics which deals with the properties of the 
natural numbers. As Dirichlet observed long ago, the whole 
of the subject would be coextensive with mathematical analysis 
in general; but it is convenient to restrict it to certain fields 
where the appropriateness of the above definition is fairly 
obvious. Even so, the domain of the subject is becoming more 
and more comprehensive, as the methods of analysis become 
more systematic and more exact. 

The first noteworthy classification of the natural numbers is into 
those which are prime and those which are composite. A prime 
number is one which is not exactly divisible by any number except 
itself and 1; all others are composite. The number of primes is 
infinite (Eucl. Elem. ix. 20), and consequently, if n is an assigned 
number, however large, there is an infinite number (a) of primes 
greater than n. 

If m, n are any two numbers, and m>n t we can always find a 
definite chain of positive integers (51, n), (j 2 , r 2 ), &c, such that 

	m = gin+n, n=g 2 ri+r 2 , ri = g s r 2 +r», &c. 

with n>ri>rj>rj . . .; the process by which they are calculated 
will be called restduation. Since there is only a finite number of 
positive integers less than n, the process must terminate with two 
equalities of the form 

	Thr-z = qhThr-i +r*, rh-i = qh+in. 

Hence we infer successively that r* is a divisor of r*_i, o_»,. . .n, 
and finally of m and n. Also n is the greatest common factor of m, 
n: because any common factor must divide n, r», and so on down to 
n; and the highest factor of r* is r* itself. It will pe convenient to 
write r* = dv (m, n). If r* = i, the numbers m, n are said to be prime 
to each other, or co-primes. 

25. The foregoing theorem of residua tion is of the greatest im- 
portance; with the help of it we can prove three other fundamental 
propositions, namely: — 

(1) If m, n are any two natural numbers, we can always find two 
other natural numbers x, y such that 

	dv(m,w) =xm- yn. 

(2) If m, n are prime to each other, and p is a prime factor of mn, 
then p must be a factor of either m or n. 

(3) Every number may be uniquely expressed as a product of 
prime factors. 

Hence if n—p°-q^n ... is the representation of any number was 
the product of powers of different primes, the divisors of n are the 
terms of the product 

U+P+P+ . • . +P*)* (1+2+ ,. • • +<^) (i+r+ . . . +r*) . ... 

their number is (a+i) 0?+i) (7+1) . . .; and their sum is 
1 1 (p a+l — 1 ) -5- 1 1 (p — 1 ). This includes 1 and n among the divisors of n. 

26. Totients. — By the toticnt of w, which is denoted, after Eulcr, by 
<j>(n), we mean the number of integers prime to n, and not exceeding 
n. If n=p* t the numbers not exceeding n and not prime to it are 

	p, 2p, . . . (p a —p), p* of which the number is p a ~ x 
	p a ~p a l . If m, n are prime to each other, 4*{mn)- 

: hence

	<t>(p a ) — 4>(m)4>(n)\ and 

hence for the general case, if n=p a g^ry . . . M^-Up^^p — i), 
where the product applies to all the different prime factors of n. If 
di, d Xi &c, are the different divisors of w, 

	<M<*i)+<*W + . .. =n. 

For example, i5= , *(i5)+*(5)+*(3)+*(0 -8+4+2 + 1. 

27. Residues and congruences. — It will now be convenient to 
include in the term " number " both zero and negative integers. 
Two numbers a, b are said to be congruent with respect to the modulus 
m, when (a — b) is divisible by m. This is expressed by the notation 
a=b (mod m) ; which was invented by Gauss. The fundamental 
theorems relating to congruences are 

If a=b and c=d (mod m), then a*=c=b*=d, and abs=cd. 

If ha=kb(mod m) then asJ (mod w/d), where rf = dv(/j, m). 

^ Thus the theory of congruences is very nearly, but not quite, 
similar to that of algebraic equations. With respect to a given 
modulus m the scale of relative integers may be distributed into m 
classes, any two elements of each class being congruent with respect 
to m. Among these will be <t>(m) classes containing numbers prime to 
m. By taking any one number from each class we obtain a complete 
system of residues to the modulus m. Supposing (as we shall always 
do) that m is positive, the numbers o, i, 2, . . . (m — 1) form a 
system of least positive residues; according as m is odd or even, 
o,=*=i,=*=2, ...=*=§ (rn-i), or o,=*=i,=*=2, . . . =*=§(»j-2),£m form a 
system of absolutely least residues. 

28. The Theorems of Fermat and Wilson. — Let n, r 2 , . . . rt 
where t = <f>(m) t be a complete set of residues prime to the modulus 
m. Then if x is any number prime to m, the residues xr x , xr 2 , . . . xr t 
also form a complete set prime to m (§ 27). Consequently 
xr\'Xr t . . . xr,==rir 2 . . .n, and dividing by r\n . . . r<, which is 
prime to the modulus, we infer that 

	a^( m ) = i(mod m). 

which is the general statement of Fermat's theorem. If m is a prime 
p, it becomes x^si (mod p). 

For a prime modulus p there will be among the set x, 2x t 3*, . . . 
(p — i)x just one and no more that is congruent to i: let this be 
xy. If y=ac, we must have* 2 — 1 —(x — 1) (x+i) =0, and hence x= *i : 
consequently the residues 2, 3, 4, . . . (p — 2) can be arranged in 
i (P~ 3) pairs (x, y) such that xy=l. Multiplying them all together, 
we conclude that 2.3.4. ...(^-2)si and hence, since \.{p— i)s — 1, 

	(/>-i)!=-i (mod p). 

which is Wilson's theorem. It may be generalized, like that of 
Fermat, but the result is not very interesting. If m is composite 
(m — 1)! + 1 cannot be a multiple of m: because m will have a prime 
factor p which is less than m, so that (w — 1)!=0 (mod p). Hepce 
Wilson s theorem is invertible: but it does not supply any practical 
test to decide whether a given number is prime. 

29. Exponents, Primitive Roots, Indices. — Let p denote an odd 
prime, and x any number prime to p. Among the powers 
x, x 2 , x s , . . . x 1 ^ 1 there is certainly one, namely x* -1 , which 
= 1 (mod p); let #*bc the lowest power oi x such that x*si. Then 
e is said to be the exponent to which x appertains (mod p) : it is 
always a factor of (/>— 1) and can only be 1 when xsi. The 
residues x for which e = p — 1 are said to be primitive roots of p. They 
always exist, their number is <£(/>— 0» and they can be found by a 
methodical, though tedious, process of exhaustion. If g is any one of 
them, the complete set may be represented by g, g°, £, . . . &c. 
where a, b, &c, are the numbers less than (p—i) and prime to it, 
other than 1. Every number x which is prime to p is congruent, 
mod p, to g i t where i is one of the numbers I, 2, 3, . , . (/>— 1); this 
number t is called the index of x to the base g. Indices are analogous 
to logarithms: thus 

	indflOcy^indfX-HndflY- ind ? (;c*)=ft ind^x (mod p — i). 

Consequently tables of primitive roots and indices for different 
primes are of great value for arithmetical purposes. Jacobi's Conon 
Arithmeticus gives a primitive root, and a table of numbers and 
indices for all primes less than 1 000. 

For moduli of the forms 2p, p m , 2p m there is an analogous theory 
(and also for 2 and 4) ; but for a composite modulus of other forms 
there are no primitive roots, and the nearest analogy is the representa- 
tion of prime residues in the form a* {P x* . . . ^ where a, p, y t . . . 
are selected prime residues, and x t y, z, . . . are indices of restricted 
range. For instance, all residues prime to 48 can be exhibited in the 
form 5* 7 V 13', where x = o, 1, 2, 3; y-o, 1; z=o, 1; the total 
number of distinct residues being 4.2.2 = 16=^(48), as it should be. 

30. Linear Congruences. — The congruence a'x=.b' (mod m') has 
no solution unless dv(a', m') is a factor of 6'. If this condition is 
satisfied, we may replace the given congruence by the equivalent 
one ox=b (mod w), where a is prime to 6 as well as to m. By residua- 
tion (§§ 24, 25) we can find integers k, k such that ak — wft = i, and 
thence obtain x=bh (mod m) as the complete solution of the given 
congruence. To the modulus m' there are m'jm incongruent solutions. 
For example, 12^=30 (mod 21) reduces to 2*=5 (mod 7) whence 
*=6(mod7)=6 1 13, 20 (mod 21). There is a theory of simultaneous 
linear congruences in any number of variables, first developed with 
precision by Smith. In any particular case, it is best to replace as 
many as possible of the given congruences by an equivalent set 
obtained by successively eliminating the variables re, y, z, . . . in 
order. An important problem is to find a number which lias given 
residues with respect to a given set of moduli. When possible, the 
solution is of the form x=a (mod m), where m is the least common 
multiple ol the moduli. Supposing that p is a prime, and that we 
have a corresponding table of indices, the solution of ax =b (m od p) 
can be found by observing that ind re=ind b-ind a (mod p-i). 

31. Quadratic Residues. Law of Reciprocity. — To an odd prime 
modulus p, the numbers 1, 4, 9, ... (p~i) 2 are congruent to 
i(p~i) residues only, because (p-^x) 2 =x 2 . Thus for p — $, we have 
1, 4, 9, 16=1, 4, 4, 1 respectively. There are therefore l(p-i) 
quadratic residues and §(£71) quadratic non-residues prime to p; 
and there is a corresponding division of incongruent classes of 
integers with respect top. The product of two residues or of two non- 
residues is a residue; that of a residue and a non-residue is a non- 
residue; and taking any primitive root as base the index of any 
number is even or odd according as the number is a residue or a non- 
residue. Gauss writes aRp, aNp to denote that a is a residue or non- 
residue of p respectively. 

Given a table of indices, the solution of x 2 = a(mod p) when possible, 
is found from 2ind x=ind a (mod p-i), and the result may be 
written in the form re== =*=r (mod p). But it is important to discuss 
the congruence re 2 = a without assuming that we have a table of 
indices. It is sufficient to consider the case jc 2 ==g (mod p), where q 
is a positive prime less than p; and the question arises whether the 
quadratic character of q with respect to p can be deduced from that of 
p with respect to q. The answer is contained in the following theorem, 
which is called the law of quadratic reciprocity (for real positive odd 
primes): if p, q are each or one of them of the form dw-f-i, then 
p t q are each of them a residue, or each a non-residue of the other; 
but if p, q are each of the form 4W+3, then according as p is a residue 
or non-residue of q we have q a non-residue or a residue of p. 

Legendre introduced a symbol ( ^J which denotes + 1 or -1 ac- 
cording as mRq or mNq (j being a positive odd prime and m any 
number prime to q)\ with its help we may express the law of re- 
ciprocity in the form 

	(?) (I) -(-d*^- 

This theorem was first stated by Legendre, who only partly 
proved it; the first complete proof, by induction, was published by 
Gauss, who also discovered five (or six) other more or less inde- 
pendent proofs of it. Many others have since been invented. 

There are two supplementary theorems relating to -I and 2 
respectively, which may be expressed in the form 

	£zl) =( _ I)J <^. g) -(-,)**->. 

where p is any positive odd prime. 
It follows from the definition that 

	/ Pi«P£p 3 v ... \ _ /M « /PA fi /PA y 

and that {—} = yj)t if »**»*' (mod q). As a simple application of 
the law of reciprocity, let it be required to find the quadratic char- 
acter of 11 with respect to 1907. We have 

	<&)~(W--(8)- 

because 6N1 1. Hence 11R1907. 

Legendre's symbol was extended by Jacobi in the following 
manner. Let P be any positive odd number, and let p, p' f p", &c. be 
its (equal or unequal) prime factors, so that P = pp'p' f Then 

if Q is any number prime to P, we have a generalized symbol defined 

	®-® <»(»••• 

This symbol obeys the law that, if Q is odd and positive, 

	© (?) =(-D 1(p - I)(Q - I) ' 

with the supplementary laws 

	0r)-<-o" p - , \ (|)=(-o J(pl - l >. 

It is found convenient to add the conventions that 

when Q and P are both odd ; and that the value of the symbol is o 
when P, Q are not co-primes. 

In order that the congruence x*= a (mod m) may have a solution 
it is necessary and sufficient that a be a residue of each distinct prime 
factor of m If these conditions are all satisfied, and m = 2«/>*g*. . , , 
where p, q, &c.» are the distinct odd prime factors of w, being / in all, 
the number of incongruent solutions of the given congruence is 
2 l , 2 m or 2 t+ *, according as k<2, k = 2, or k>2 respectively. The 
actual solutions are best found by a process of exhaustion. It should 
be observed that f — J = 1 is a necessary but not a sufficient condition 
for the possibility of the congruence. 

32. Quadratic forms. — It will be observed that the solution of the 
linear congruence ax=b (mod m) leads to all the representations of b 
in the form ax-j-my f where x f y are integers. Many of the earliest 
researches in the theory of numbers deal with particular cases of the 
problem: given four numbers m, a, b, c } it is required to find all the 
integers x, y (if there be any) which satisfy the equation ax 2 -\-bxy-\- 
cyt — m. Fermat, for instance, discovered that every positive prime of 
the form 4#-j-i is uniquely expressible as the sum of two squares. 
There is a corresponding arithmetical theory for forms of any degree 
and any number of variables; only those of linear forms and binary 
quadratics are in any sense complete, as the difficulty of the problem 
increases very rapidly with the increase of the degree of the form 
considered or of the number of variables contained in it. 

The form ax 2 -\-bxy-{-cy i will be denoted by (a, b, c ) (re, y) 2 or more 
simply by (a, b, c ) when there is no need of specifying the variables. 
If k is the greatest common factor of a, b, c, we may write (a, b, c) = 
k(a', b', c'J where (a', b\ c') is a primitive form, that is, one for which 
dv (a\ b\ c') = i. The other form is th^n said to be derived from 
(a', b\ c f ) and to have a divisor k. For the present we shall concern 
ourselves only with primitive forms. Writing D = b 2 ~4ac f the 
invariant D is called the' determinant of (a f b t c), and there is a first 
classification of forms into definite forms for which D is negative, and 
indefinite forms for which D is positive. The case D = or a positive 
square is rejected, because in that case the form breaks up into the 
product of two linear factors. . It will be observed that D = o, 1 (mod 
4) according as b is even or odd ; and that if k 2 is any odd square 
factor of D there will be forms of determinant D and divisor k. 

If we write x' = ax-\-&y, y 1 = yx+6y, we have identically 

	(a,b,c)(x' f yy = (a',b',c')(x iy )* 

where 

	a' — aa 2 -f- b ay + oy 2 
	b' =2aaP+b(a5+Py) +2cy8 
	c' = afP+bpb-\-b 2 

Hence also ' 

	D' - b^a'c' = (a8 -Py) 2 (b 2 -$ac) = (a5 -&y)* D. 

Supposing that a, 0, 7, 5 are integers such that at— 0y = n, a number 
different from zero, (a, 6, c) is said to be transformed into (a', b\ c) by 
the substitution (* g) of the wth order. If n 2 = i, the two forms 
are said to be equivalent, and the equivalence is said to be proper or 
improper according asw=i or« = -i. In the case of equivalence, 
not only are x\ y integers wherever re, y are so, but conversely; 
hence every number representable by (a, b f c) is representable by 
(a', b\ c') and conversely. For the present we shall deal with proper 
equivalence only and write /~f to indicate that the forms/,/' are 
properly equivalent. Equivalent forms have the same divisor. A 
complete set of equivalent forms is said to form a class; classes of the 
same divisor are said to form an order, and of these the most important 
is the principal order, which consists of the primitive classes. It is a 
fundamental theorem that for a given determinant the number of 
classes is finite; this is proved by showing that every class must 
contain one at least of a certain finite number of so-called reduced 
forms, which can be found by definite rules of calculation. 

33. Method of Reduction. — This differs according as D is positive 
or negative, and will require some preliminary lemmas. Suppose 
that any complex quantity z~x-\-yi is represented in the usual way 
by a point (re, y) referred to rectangular axes. Then by plotting 
off all the points corresponding to (az-h9) / (ys+5), we obtain 
a complete set of properly equivalent points. These all lie 
on the same side of the axis of re, and there is precisely one of 
them and no more which satisfies the conditions: (i.) that it 
is not outside the area which is bounded by the lines 2re= =*=i ; (ii.) 
that it is not inside the circle tf+yt^i ; (iii.) that it is not on the 
line 2rc = i, or on the arcs ol the circle x 2 -\-y?=i intercepted by 
2x — 1 and rc±=o. This point will be called the reduced point equiva- 
lent to z. In the positive half-plane (y>o) the. aggregate of all 
reduced points occupies the interior and half the boundary of an 
area which will be called the fundamental triangle, because the areas 
equivalent to it, and finite, are all triangles bounded by circular arcs, 
and having angles |x, i;r, o and the fundamental triangle may be 
considered as a special case when one vertex goes to infinity. The 
aggregate of equivalent triangles forms a kind of mosaic which fills 
up the whole of the positive half-plane. It will be convenient to 
denote the fundamental triangle (with its half-boundary, for which 
#<o)by V ; for a reason which will appear later, the set of equivalent 
triangles will be said to make up the modular dissection of the positive 
half-plane. 

Now let f = (a' f b\ c r ) be any definite form with a' positive and 
determinant — A. The root of a z*+&'z-fc'=o which is represented 
by a point in the positive half-plane is 

	-b'+HA 
	w= a*' • 

and this is a reduced point if either 

	(i.) 6' <a'<c' 
	(ii.) b' = a', a^c' 
	(iii.) a' =c / , cxV^a'. 

Cases (ii.) and (iii.) only occur when the representative point is on the 
boundary of V. A form whose representative point is reduced is 
said to be a reduced form. It follows from the geometrical theory 
that every form is equivalent to a reduced form, and that there are 
as many distinct classes of positive forms of determinant— A as 
there are reduced forms. The total number of reduced forms is 
limited, because in case (i.)we have A =4ac — b*> 36*, so that 6<V£a, 
while 4a*<Aac< A+6 2 <i A; in case (ii.) A = 4ac— a*>3a J , or else 
a = 6 = c = V?A; incase (iii.) A = 4a J — &*>3&*,4a*=A+&*< JA.orelse 
a = 6 = c = ViA. With the help of these inequalities a complete set 
of reduced forms can be found by trial, and the number of classes 
determined. The latter cannot exceed i A ; it is in general much less. 

With an indefinite form (a, b f c) we may associate the representative 
circle 

which cuts the axis of x in two real points. The form is said to be 
reduced if this circle cuts V; the condition for this is a(a=*= £&+c)<0, 
which can be expressed in the form 3fl 2 +(a=*=6) J <D, and it is hence 
clear that the absolute values of a, 6, and therefore of c, are limited. 
As before, there are a limited number of reduced forms, but they 
are not all non-equivalent. In fact they arrange themselves, accord- 
ing to a law which is not very difficult to discover, in cycles or periods, 
each of which is associated with a particular class. The main result 
is the same as before: that the number of classes is finite, and that 
for each class we can find a representative form by a finite process of 
calculation. 

34. Problem of Representation. — It is required to find out whether 
a given number m* can be represented by the given form (a', 6', c'). 
One condition is clearly that the divisor of the form must be a factor 
of m\ Suppose this is the case; and let m, (a, b> c) be the quotients 
of m* and (a', b\ c') be the divisor in question. Then we have now 
to discover whether m can be represented by the primitive form 
(a, 6, c). First of all we will consider proper representations 

	m = (a, 6, c) (a, 7)* 

where a, 7 a re co-primes. Determine integers 0, 5 such that a5— &y ~ I, 
and apply to (a, b, c) the substitution f *' ^J ; the new form will be 

	(m, n, /)» where 

	n* — 4ml - D = &* — 4<wr. 

Consequently n* = D (mod 4m), and D must be a quadratic residue 
of m. Unless this condition is satisfied, there is no proper repre- 
sentation of m by any form of determinant D. Suppose, however, 
that n* = D (mod 4m) is soluble and that n u n* f &c. arc its roots. 
Takinganyoneofthese,say Wi.wecanfindout whether (w, w», /») and 
(a, b t c) are equivalent; if they are, there is a substitution ( ' J 
which converts the latter into the former, and then m = aa*+bay+cy l . 
As to derived representations, if m-(a, b f c) (/x, ty)* t then m must 
have the square factor **, and mlt* = (a, b t c) (x, y) 2 ; henceevery- 
thing may be made to depend on proper representation by primitive 
forms. 

35. Autotnorpks. The Pellian Equation. — A primitive form 
(a, 6, c) is, by definition, equivalent to itself; but it may be so in 
more ways than one. In order that (a, b t c) may be transformed into 
"itself by the substitution ( g) • it is necessary and sufficient that 

	(*,ff\ _'(W+bu), -on \ 
	\y f 8/ ~ \ au, h{t-bu)J 

where (/, u) is an integral solution of 

	^-D« J = 4. 

If D is negative and — D>4, the only solutions are /= =*=2, u-0; 
D = -3 gives (=*=2, o), (±1, =*=i); D=-4 gives (±2, o), (o, =*=i). 
On the other hand, if D>o the number of solutions is infinite, and if 
(/i, Wi) is the solution for which /, « have their least positive values, 
all the other positive solutions may be found from 

	^±HWD.(M^VD)" (W =2,3,4...). 

The substitutions by which (a, 6, c) is transformed into itself are called 
its automorphs. In the case when D=o (mod 4) we have / = 2T, 
« = 2U, D = 4N, and (T, U) any solution of 

	T*-NU* = i. 

This is usually called the Pellian equation, though it should properly 
be associated with Fermat, who first perceived its importance. The 
minimum solution can be found by converting VN into a periodic 
continued fraction. 

The form (a, 6, c) may be improperly equivalent to itself; in this 
case all its improper automorphs can be expressed in the form 

	/ X , (K+b\)l2a\ 
	\(K-b\)l2c, -X / 

where «* — DX* = 4^c. In particular, if 6 so {mod a) the form (a, b,c) 
is improperly equivalent to itself. A form improperly equivalent to 
itself is said to be ambiguous. 

36. Characters of a form or class. Genera. — Let (a, 6, c) be any 
primitive form; we have seen above (§ 32) that if a, 0, 7, 5 are any 
integers 

	4(aa t +bay+cy t )(a0 1 +b08+c&)>=b' 1 -(a&-0y)*D 

where b f = 2aa0+b(a8-\-0y)+2cy$. Now the expressions in brackets 
on the left hand may denote any two numbers «, n representable 
by the form (a, 6, c);the formula shows that $mn is a residue of D, 
and hence mn is a residue of every odd prime factor of D, and if p is 
any such factor the symbols l-r) and (r ) will have the same value. 
Putting (a, 6, c) =/, this common value is denoted by (*A and called 
a quadratic character (or simply character) of / with respect to p. 
Since a is representable by/ (x = 1, y = 0) the value \*A is the same as 
\d) * ^ or exam pl e » if D = —140, the scheme of characters for the 
six reduced primitive forms, and therefore for the classes they 
represent, is 

(i» 0,35) 
+ + 
5.o.7) , 
3.=*=2, 12) 

In certain cases there are supplementary characters of the type 
l—F J and ( -j ) 1 and the characters \*r ) are discriminated according 
as an odd or even power of p is contained in D; but in every case 
there are certain combinations of characters (in number one-half of 
all possible combinations) which form the total characters of actually 
existing classes. Classes which have the same total character are 
said to belong to the same genus. Each genus of the same order 
contains the same number of classes. 

For any determinant D we have a principal primitive class for 
which all the characters are + ; this is represented by the principal 
form (1, Oj—n) or (1, 1,— n) according as D is of the form An or 4»4-i. 
The corresponding genus is called the principal genus. Thus, whea 
D = — 140, it appears from the table above that in the primitive 
order there are two genera, each containing three classes; and the 
non-existent total characters arc -\ — and — (-• 

37. Composition. — Considering X, Y as given lineo-linear functions 
of (x, y), (x', y') defined by the equations 

	X = poxx' +frxy' +p*x'y+ptyy' 
	Y = qoxx' +2ix/ +qix'y +qzy? 

we may have identically, in x, y, x', y\ 

	(A, B, C) (X, Y)« = (a, b t c) (*, y)'X («', b\ c>) (x', /)* 

and, this being so, the form (A, B, C) is said to be compounded of 
the two forms (a, 6. c), (a', 6', c'), the order of composition being 
indifferent. In order that two forms may admit of composition into 
a third, it is necessary and sufficient that their determinants be in the 
ratio of two squares. The most important case is that of two 
primitive forms #, x of the same determinant; these can be com- 
pounded into a form denoted by^x or x^ which is also primitive and 
of the same determinant as^orx^ IfA,B,C are the classes to which 
4>, Xi <f>x respectively belong, then any fprm of A compounded with 
any form of B gives rise to a form belonging to C. For this reason we 
write C=AB«=BA, and speak of the multiplication or composition 
of classes. The principal class is usually denoted by I, because when 
compounded with any other class A it gives this same class A. 

The total number of primitive classes being finite, h, say, the series 
A, A 1 , A', &c, must be recurring, and there will be a least exponent 
e such that A J = 1. This exponent is a factor of h, so that every class 
satisfies A* = i. Composition is associative as well as commutative, 
that is to say, (AB)C = A(BC); hence the symbols Ai, Aj,. . . A* 
for the h different classes define an Abelian group (see Groups) of 
order h, which is representable by one or ^ more base-classes 
Bi, Bj, . . . B,- in such a way that each class A is enumerated once 
and only once by putting 

	A = Bi J Bt»...B»* (x^m,y^n, ...z£p) 

with mn...p*=h f and Bi* = B a * — . . . = 3*" « 1 . Moreover, the bases 
may be so chosen that m is a multiple of «, n of the next correspond- 
ing index, and so on. The same thing may be said with regard 
to the symbols for the classes contained in the principal genus, 
because two forms of that genus compound into one of the same 
kind. If this latter group is cyclical, that is, if all the classes of 
the principal genus can be represented in the form i, A, A 2 ,. . .A* -1 , 
the determinant D is said to be regular; if not, the determinant is 
irregular. It has been proved that certain specified classes of 
determinants are always irregular; but no complete criterion has 
been found, other than working out the whole set of primitive classes, 
and determining the group of the principal genus, for deciding 
whether a given determinant is irregular or not. 

If A, B are any two classes, the total character of AB is found by 
compounding the characters of A and B. In particular, the class^ A 2 , 
' which is called the duplicate of A, always belongs to the principal 
•genus. Gauss proved, conversely, that every class in the principal 
genus may be expressed as the duplicate of a class. An ambiguous 
class satisfies A 2 = i , that is, its duplicate is the principal class ; and 
the converse of this is true. Hence if Bi, B2, . . . B»- are the base- 
classes for the whole composition-group, and A^Bi'B^. . . B»* 
(as above) A 2 = 1, if 2x=o or m, 2y = o or n, &c. ; hence the number 
of ambiguous classes is 2*. As an example, when D = — 1460, there 
are four ambiguous classes, represented by 

	(1, o, 365), (2, 2, 183), (5, o, 73), (io, io, 39); 

hence the composition-group must be dibasic, and in fact, if we put 
Bi, B 2 for the classes represented by (11, 6, 34) and (2, 2, 183), we 
have Bi 10 = B 2 2 = i and the 20 primitive classes are given by 
BfBj*(x£ 10, y£2). In this case the determinant is regular and 
the classes in the principal genus are 1, Bi 2 , B^, Bi 8 , Br 5 . 

38. On account of its historical interest, we may briefly consider 
the form x 2 -{-y t 1 for which* D= —4. If p is an odd prime of the form 
£»-r-ii the congruence m 2 =? — 4(mod 4p) is soluble (§ 31); let one of 
its roots be m, and m 2 +4 = $p. Then (p, m, I) is of determinant —4, 
and, since there is only one primitive class for this determinant, we 
must have (p, m. l)~ (1, o, 1). By known rules we can actually find 
a substitution ( a * ^) which converts the first form into the second; 
this being so, (_ ) will transform the second into the first, and we 
shall have p = 7 2 -H 2 , a representation of p as the sum of two squares. 
This is unique, except that we may put p = (= fc 7) 2 4-(= fc 5) 2 . We also 
have 2 = I 2 + 1 2 while no prime 4«+3 admits of such a representation. 
The theory of composition for this determinant is expressed by 
the identity (x 2 +;y 2 ) (x' 2 +/ 2 ) = {xx , ±yy , Y +(xy'=*= yx'Y ; and by re- 
peated application of this, and the previous theorem, we can show 
that if N=2 a pPq c . . ., where p, q } ... are odd primes of the form 
4n+if we can find solutions of N^^+y 2 , and indeed distinct 
solutions. For instance 65 = i 2 4-8 2 = 4 2 +7 2 , and conversely two 
distinct representations N =x 2 -\-y i = u 2 -\-v 2 lead to the conclusion that 
N is composite. This is a simple example of the application of the 
theory of forms to the difficult problem of deciding whether a given 
large number is prime or composite; an application first indicated by 
Gauss, though, in the present simple case, probably known to Fermat. 

39. Number of classes. Class-number Relations. — It appears from 
Gauss's posthumous papers that he solved the very difficult problem 
of finding a formula for fc(D), the number of properly primitive classes 
for the determinant D. The first published solution, however, was 
that of P. G. L. Dirichlct; it depends on the consideration of series 
of the form X(ax 2 -\-bxy-\-cy l )~ 1 ~* where 5 is a positive quantity, 
ultimately made very small. L. Kronecker has shown the connexion 
of Dirichlet's results with the theory of elliptic functions, and ob- 
tained more comprehensive formulae by taking (a, 6, c) as the 
standard type of a quadratic fcrm, whereas Gauss, Diiichlet, and 
most of their successors, took (a, 26, c) as the standard, calling 
(fr 2 — ac) its determinant. As a sample of the kind of formulae that 
are obtained, let p be a prime of the form 4*1+3; then 

	fc(- 4 p) =2a-2/3, h(ip) log (t+uj p) =log O (tan^ 

where in the first formula Xa means the sum of all quadratic residues 
of p contained in the series 1, 2, 3,. . .§(p~i) and 2/S is the sum 
of the remaining non-residues; while in the second formula (/, u) is 
the least positive solution of Z 2 — pw 2 = i, and the product extends to 
all values of b in the set 1, 3, 5,. ..(4^ — 1) of which p is a non- 
residue. The remarkable fact will be noticed that the second formula 
gives a solution of the Pellian equation in a trigonometrical form. 

Kronecker was the first to discover, in connexion with the complex 
multiplication of elliptic functions, the simplest instances of a very 
curious group of arithmetical formulae involving sums of class- 
numbers and other arithmetical functions; the theory of these re- 
lations has been greatly extended by A. Hurwitz. The simplest of 
all these theorems may be stated as follows. Let H (A) represent the 
number of classes for the determinant —A, with the convention that 
J and not 1 is to be reckoned for each class containing a reduced form 
of the type (a, o, a) and £ for each class containing a reduced form 
(a, o, a) ; then if n is any positive integer, 

	2 H(4w-K 2 )=*(n)+^(n) (-2Vn^*^2Vn) 
	k-o,-H,. . . 

where 3>(n) means the sum of the divisors of n, and ^(n) means the 
excess of the sum of those divisors of n which are greater than V n 
over the sum of those divisors which are less than V n. The formula 
is obtained by calculating in two different ways the number of 
reduced values of 2 which satisfy the modular equation ]{nz)— J(z), 
where J (2) is the absolute invariant which, for the elliptic function 
p(w; g 2 , gs) is g2*+ (g 2 a — 27g a 2 ), and 2 is the ratio of any two primitive 
periods taken so that the real part of iz is negative (see below, § 68). 
It should be added that there is a series of scattered papers by 
J. Liouville, which implicitly contain^ Kronecker's class-number 
relations, obtained by a purely arithmetical process without any use 
of transcendents. 

40. Bilinear Forms. — A bilinear form means an expression of the 
type paikXiyt (i = l, 2,. . .m\ &»i, 2,. . .n); the most important 
case is when m~n t and only this will be considered here. The 
invariants of a form are its determinant [a BB ] and the elementary 
factors thereof. Two bilinear forms are equivalent when each can 
be transformed into the other by linear integral substitutions 
x f — Xax, y r = 2fiy. Every bilinear form is equivalent to a reduced 

r 
form XeiXtyi, and r = «, unless [a n «] =0. In order that two forms may 

be equivalent it is necessary and sufficient that their invariants 
should be the same. Moreover, if a*6 and c~d, and if the invariants 
of the forms a+\c t b-\-\d are the same for all values of X, we shall 
have a-\-\c~b+kd f and the transformation of one form to the other 
may be effected by a substitution which does not involve X. The 
theory of bilinear forms practically includes that of quadratic forms, 
if we suppose xu y* to be cogredient variables. Kronecker has de- 
veloped the case when n — 2, and deduced various class-relations for 
quadratic forms in a manner resembling that of LiouviHe. So far 
as the bilinear forms are concerned, the main result is that the 
number of classes for the positive determinant 011022—012021= A is 
i2l*(A)+^(A)}4-26, where c is 1 or o according as A is or is not a 
square, and the symbols $, ^ have the meaning previously assigned 
to them (§ 39). 

41. Higher Quadratic Forms. — The algebraic theory of quadratics 
is so complete that considerable advance has been made in the much 
more complicated arithmetical theory. Among the most important 
results relating to the general case of n variables are the proof that 
the class-number is finite; the enumeration of the arithmetical 
invariants of a form; classification according to orders and genera, 
and proof that genera with specified characters exist; also the de- 
termination of all the rational transformations of a given form into 
itself. Jn connexion with a definite form there is the important 
conception of its weight; this is defined as the reciprocal of the 
number of its proper automorphs. Equivalent forms are of the same 
weight; this is defined to be the weight of their class. The weight 
of a genus or order is the sum of the weights of the classes contained 
in it; and expressions for the weight of a given genus have actually 
been obtained. For binary forms the sum of the weights of all the 
genera coincides with the expression denoted by H (A) in § 39. The 
complete discussion of a form requires the consideration of (n— 2) 
associated quadratics ; one of these is the contravariant of the given 
form, each of the others contains more than n variables. For certain 
quaternary and senary classes there are formulae analogous to the 
class-relations for binary forms referred to in § 39 (see Smith, Proc. 
R.S. xvi., or Collected Papers t i. 510). 

Among the most interesting special applications of the theory are 
certain propositions relating to the representation of numbers as 
the sum of squares. In order that a number may be expressible as the 
sum of two squares it is necessary and sufficient for it to be of the 
form PQ 2 , where P has no square factor and no prime factor of the 
form 4W-h3> * A number is expressible as the sum of three squares if, 
and only if, it is of the form m 2 n with n~ 1, =*=2 =*=3 (mod 8) ; when 
m — \ and n = 3 (mod 8), all the squares are odd, and hence follows 
Fermat 's theorem that every number can be expressed as the sum 
of three triangular numbers (one or two of which may be o). Another 
famous theorem of Format's is that every number can be expressed* 
as the sum of four squares; this was first proved by Jacobi, who also 
proved that the number of solutions of n^xP+y^+zt+P is 8$(w), if 
n is odd, while if n is even it is 24 times the sum of the odd factors of 
n. Explicit and finite, though more complicated, formulae have been 
obtained for the number of representations of n as the sum of five, 
six, seven and eight squares respectively. As an example of the 
outstanding difficulties of this part of the subject may be mentioned 
the problem of finding all the integral (not merely rational) auto- 
morphs of a given form /. When / is ternary, C. Hermite has^ shown 
that the solution depends on finding all the integral solutions of 
F(x, v, z)-\-P~ I* where F is the contravariant of/. 

Thanks to the researches of Gauss, Eisenstein, Smith, Hermite 
and others, the theory of ternary quadratics is much less incomplete 
than that of quadratics with four or more variables. Thus^ methods 
of reduction have been found both for definite and for indefinite 
forms; so that it would be possible to draw up a table of repre- 
sentative forms, if the result were worth the labour. One specially 
important theorem is the solution of axP+b^+cz 2 =0 ; this is always 
possibleif —be, —ca, — ab are quadratic residues of a, 6, c respectively, 
and a formula can then be obtained which furnishes all the solutions. 

42. Complex Numbers. — One of Gauss's most Important and far- 
reaching contributions to arithmetic was his introduction of complex 
integersa+fo, where a, b are ordinary integers, and, as usual, »*= — 1. 
In this theory' there are four units =*=i, =*»; the numbers i h (a+bi) 
are said to be associated; a — bi is the conjugate of a+bi and we 
write N(a=*=to)=a J -f &*! the norm of a+W, its conjugate, and asso- 
ciates. The most fundamental proposition in the theory is that the 
process of iesiduation (§ 24) is applicable; namely, if m, n are any 
two complex integers and N(m)>N(n), we can always find integers 
g, r such that m=qn+r with N(r)^JN(w). This may be proved 
analytically, but is obvious if we mark complex integers by points 
in a plane. Hence immediately follow propositions about resolutions 
into prime factors, greatest common measure, &c, analogous to 
those in the ordinary theory; it will only be necessary to indicate 
special pcints of difference. 

We have 2 = —i(i+i) 1 , so that 2 is associated with a square; a 
real prime of the form 4*1+3 is still a prime, but one of the form 
4rt+i breaks up into two conjugate prime factors, for example. 
5 = (i— 2t)(i+2i) An integer is even, seini-even, or odd according 
as it is divisible by (1 +*)*t (1 -ft) or is prime to (1 +t). Among (our 
associated odd integers there is one and only one which = 1 (mod 2 + 
2t); this is said to be primary; the conjugate of a^ primary 
number is primary, and the product of any number of primaries is 
primary. The conditions that a+bi may be primary are 6=0 (mod 
2) a+b — 1 = (mod 4). Every complex integer can be uniquely 
expressed in the form i*(i+t)*a*Wcr. . ., where o^m<4, and 
a, b, c, . . . are primary primes. 

VVith respect to a complex modulus m, all complex integers may 
be distributed into N(w) incongruous classes. tf m=h(a+bi) where 
a, b are co-primes, we may take as representatives of these classes 
the residues x+yi where x=o, 1, 2,.. .{(a^+fc 2 ^ — 1); y = o, 1, 2, 
...(h — 1). Thus when 6 = we may take x=o t 1, 2,... (A — 1); 
y=o, 1, 2,...(h — 1), giving the h* residues of the real number h; 
while if a+bi is prime, 1, 2, 3,. . .(a i +b t — 1) form a complete 
set of residues. 

The number cf residues of m that are prime to m is given by 

	^(m)=N(m)n(i- K ^) 

where the product extends to all prime factors of m. As an analogue 
to Fermat s theorem we have, (or any integer prime to the modulus, 

	^t")= 1 (mod m),xN(*>-i= i(mod p) 

according as m is composite or prime. There are <MN(/>) — 1} 
primitive roots of the prime p\ a primitiveroot in the real theory for 
a real prime 4»+i is also a primitive root in the new theory for each 
prime factor of (4W+1), but if £ = 4«+3 be a prime its primitive 
roots are necessarily complex. 

43- If Pt 2 aie anv two ^d primes, we shall define the symbols 
(£ 1 and f £ j by the congruences 

	£}{N(g)-i}= Q jt p\[m q y-i}^ g) 4 (mod 2 ), 

it being understood that the symbols stand for absolutely least 

residues. It follows that f^j = 1 or - 1 according as p is a quadratic 

residue of q or not ; and that \jj) A = l on *y if £ is a biquadratic 

residue of q. If' p, q are primary primes, we have two law9 of 
reciprocity, expressed by the equations 

To these must be added the supplementary formulae 

	@ i -(- l)1 {N W -.),(J^) i ,(-,)i((.+*^). 

a+bi being a primary odd prime. In words, the law of biquadratic 
reciprocity for two primary odd primes may/be expressed by saying 
that the biquadratic characters of each prime with respect to the 
other are identical, unless £ = 5=3+2* (mod 4), in which case they 
are opposite. The law of biquadratic reciprocity was discovered by 
Gauss, who does not seem, however, to have obtained a complete 
proof of it. The first published proof is that of Eisenstein, which is 
very beautiful and simple, but involves the theory of lemniscate 
(unctions. A proof on the lines indicated in Gauss's posthumous 
papers has been developed by Busche; this probably admits of 
simplification. Other demonstrations, for instance Jacobi's, depend 
on cyclotomy (see below). 

44. Algebraic Numbers. — The first extension of Gauss s complex 
theory was made by E. E. Kummer, who considered complex 
numbers represented by rational integral functions of any roots of 
unity, thus including the ordinary theory and Gauss's as special 
eases. He was soon faced by the difficulty that, in some cases, the 
law that an integer can be uniquely expressed as the product of prime 
factors appeared to break down. To see how this happens take the 
equation 7; 5 +t;+6 = o, the roots of which are expressible as rational 

integral functions of 23rd roots of unity, and let t\ be either of the 
roots. If we define ari+b to be an integer, when a, 6 are natural 
numbers, the product of any number of such integers is uniquely 
expressible in the form lrj+m. Conversely every integer can be 
expressed as the product of a finite number of indecomposable 
integers a+brj, that is, integers which cannot be further resolved into 
factors of the same type. But this resolution is not necessarily 
unique: for instance 6 = 2.3=* — 17(7 + 1) » where 2, 3, rj, tj + i are all 
indecomposable and essentially distinct. To see the way in which 
Kummer surmounted the difficulty consider the congruence 

	u*+u +6= o(modp) 

where p is any prime, except 23. If —23^ this has two distinct 
roots «i, u%; and we say that an +b is divisible by the ideal prime 
factor of p corresponding to «i, if aui+b=o (mod p). For instance, 
if £ = 2 we may put «i=o, «j= 1 and there will be two ideal factors 
of 2, say pi and pi such that arj+b^o (mod pi) if b^o (mod 2) and 
arj + b=o (mod pt) if a +6=0 (mod 2). If both these congruences are 
satisfied, csftso (mod 2) and arj+b is divisible by 2 in the ordinary 
sense. Moreover {arj+b)(crj+d) = (bc+ad—ac)rj+(bd—6ac) and if 
this product is divisible by pu bd^o (mod 2), whence either arj+b 
or crj+d is divisible by pi; while if the product is divisible by p% we 
have bc+ad+bd — yac = o (mod 2) which is equivalent to (a+b) 
(c+d)=o (mod 2), so that again either arj+b or crj+d is divisible by 
pt. Hence we may properly speak of pi and pt as prime divisors. 
Similarly the congruence u 2 +u+6=o (mod 3) defines two ideal 
prime factors of 3, and arj +b is divisible by one or the other o( these 
according as 6=0 (mod 3) or 2a+b=o (mod 3); we will call these 
prime factors pi t pt. With this notation we have (neglecting unit 
factors) 

	2 -pipit $=ptp4, n=pipt* i+v=p2pi. 

Real primes of which —23 is a non-quadratic residue are also primes 
in the field (7;); and the prime factors of any number ay+b, as well 
as the degree of their multiplicity, may be found by factorizing 
(6a*— afr+fc 2 ), the norm of (arj +b). Finally every integer divisible 
by pt is expressible in the form ± im ** (i+t;)w where m, n are natural 
numbers (or zero) ; it is convenient to denote this fact by writing 
pt~[2, i+^li and calling the aggregate 2m + (i+7;)w a compound 
modulus with the base 2, 1+7;. This generalized idea of a modulus 
is very important and far-reaching ; an aggregate is a modulus when, 
if a, & are any two of its elements, a+0 ana a— & also belong to it. 
For arithmetical purposes those moduli are most useful which can be 
put into the form [oi, a2,...a„] which means the aggregate of all the 
quantities Xiai+x 2 ai+-»+*t»*t» obtained by assigning to (xi,**,.. .*„), 
independently, the values 61*1, =2, &c. Compound modulimay 
be multiplied, together, or raised to powers, by rules which will be 
plain from the following example. We have 

	pf = ti, 2(1+7;), (i+t?)*]=[4. 2+277,-5+7;] = [4. 12,-5+7;] 
	= [4. -5 +v]=ti*3+v] 

hence 

	pt 2 ^p2^pi = U> 3+*] X[2, 1 +7;] =[8, 4+47;, 6+27;, 3+4^+^1 

	= [8, 4+47;, 6+27;, -3+3*l = fo-0[';+2,7;-6,3] = (7;-i)[l,7i]. 

Hence every integer divisible by pt 1 is divisible by the actual integer 
(7; — 1) and conversely; so that in a certain sense wc may regard pt 
as a cube root. Similarly the cube of any other ideal prime is of the 
form (a7i+6)[i, 17]. According to a principle which will be explained 
further on, all primes here considered may be arranged in three 
classes; one is that of the real primes, the others each contain ideal 
primes only. As we shall see presently all these results are intimately 
connected with the fact that for the determinant —23 there are three 
primitive classes, represented by (1, 1, 6) (2, 1, 3), (2, — 1, 3) re- 
spectively. 

45. Kummer's definition of ideal primes sufficed for his particular 
purpose, and completely restored the validity of the fundamental 
theorems about factors and divisibility. His complex integers were 
more general than any previously considered and suggested a defini- 
tion o?an algebraic integer in general, which is as follows: if ai,a 5 ,...a« 
are ordinary integers (i.e. elements of R, § 7), and satisfies an 
equation of the form 

	e n +ai0 n - 1 +a# n -*+. . . +an_i0+a n =o f 

is said to be an algebraic integer. We may suppose this equation 
irreducible; 6 is then said to be of the nth order. The n roots 
0* 0\ 0*,. . .0 (n-1) are all different, and are said to be conjugate. 
If the equation began with atf* instead of 0*, would still be an 
algebraic number; every algebraic number can be put into the form 
0/m, where m is a natural number and 6 an algebraic integer. 

Associated with we have afield (or corpus) Q = R(0) consisting of 
all rational functions of with real rational coefficients; and in like 
manner we havethe conjugate fields a' = R(fl'), &c. The aggregate 
of integers contained in Q is denoted by 0. 

Every element of fi can be put into the form 
w = c o +Ci0 + ...+c«_i0*- 1 
where Co, c u ...c^i are real and rational. If these coefficients are 
all integral, « is an integer; but the converse is not necessarily true. 
It is possible, however, to find a set of integers o>i, <ot...M n belong- 
ing to a, such that every integer in fi can be uniquely expressed in 
the form 

	w=/iia>i+/i2Wi+. . .+&«&?* 

where k\, h%,... hn are elements of N which may be called the 
co-ordinates of w with respect to the base w lt W2, . . . w„. Thus o 
is a modulus (§ 44), and we may write = [«i, 02, . . . «n]. Having 
found one base, we can construct any number of equivalent bases 
by means of equations such as m f =2f »*/«*, where the rational integral 
coefficients c,-' are such that the determinant |c„nl= =*=i. 
If we write 

	VA = 
	an, 
	<o'i, 
	«2, 
	O) I, tO 2, 
	, 0.-1) 
	4- 
	COn 
	«'» 
	<0*„ 

A is a rational integer called the discriminant of the field. Its value 
is the same whatever base is chosen. 

If a is any integer in Q, the product of a and its conjugates is a 
rational integer called the norm of a, and written N(a). By consider- 
ing the equation satisfied by a we see that N(o) =aai where a L is an 
integer in fi. It follows from the definition that if a, are any two 
integers in S2, then N(a£) = N(a)N(£); and that for an ordinary real 
integer m % we have N(w) =m n . 

46. Ideals. — The extension of Kummer's results to algebraic 
numbers in general was independently made by J. W. R. Dedckind 
and Kronecker; their methods differ mainly in matters of notation 
and machinery, each having special advantages of its own for 
particular purposes. Dedekind's method is based upon the notion 
of an ideal, which is defined by the following properties: — 

(i.) An ideal m is an aggregate of integers in Q. 

(ii.) This aggregate is a modulus ; that is to say, if p, p' are any two 
elements of m (the same or different) p-p' is contained in m. Hence 
also m contains a zero element, and m+p' is an element of m. 

(iii.) If p is any clement of m, and o> any element of 0, then wp is 
an element of m. It is this property that makes the notion of an 
ideal more specific than that of a modulus. 

It is clear that ideals exist; for instance, itself is an ideal. 
Again, all integers in S2 which are divisible by a given integer a (in 0) 
form an ideal; this is called a principal ideal, and is denoted by 
oa. Every ideal can be represented by a base (§§ 44, 45), so that 
we may write m = [pi, P2, . . . p«], meaning that every element of m 
can be uniquely expressed in the form Zhiia, where hi is a rational 
integer. In other words, every ideal has a base (and therefore, of 
course, an infinite number of bases). If a, b are any two ideals, and 
if we form the aggregate of all products a& obtained by multiplying 
each element of the first ideal by each element of the second, then 
this aggregate, together with all sums of such products, is an ideal 
which is called the product of a and b and written ab or ba. In 
particular oa = a, o 2 = o ,oa . o0=qo0. This law of multiplication is 
associative as well as commutative. It is clear that every element 
of ab is contained in a: it can be proved that, conversely, if every 
element of c is contained in a, there exists an ideal b such that ab = c. 
In particular, if a is any element of a, there is an ideal a f such that 
oa = aa'. A prime ideal is one which has no divisors except itself 
and 0. It is a fundamental theorem that every ideal can be resolved 
into the product of a finite number of prime ideals, and that this 
resolution is unique. It is the decomposition of a principal ideal into 
the product of prime ideals that takes the place of the resolution of 
an integer into its prime factors in the ordinary theory. It may 
happen that all the ideals in £2 are principal ideals; in this case every 
resolution of an ideal into factors corresponds to the resolution of an 
integer into actual integral factors, and the introduction of ideals 
is unnecessary. But in every other case the introduction of ideals 
or some equivalent notion, is indispensable. When two ideals have 
been resolved into their prime factors, their greatest common 
measure and least common multiple arc determined by the ordinary 
rules. Every ideal may be expressed (in an infinite number of ways) 
as the greatest common measure of two principal ideals. 

47. There is a theory of congruences with respect to an ideal 
modulus. Thus a=0 (mod m) means that a— is an element of 
m. With respect to tn, all the integers in S2 may be arranged in a finite 
number of incongruent classes. The number of these classes is 
called the norm of m, and written N(m). The norm of a prime ideal 
p is some power of a real prime p; if N(p) — p f , p is said to be a prime 
ideal of degree/. If m, n are any two ideals, then N(mtt) =N(m)N(n). 
If N(m) =w, then m=o (mod m), and there is an ideal m' such that 
vm =mm'. The norm of a principal ideal Va is equal to the absolute 
value of N(a) as defined in § 45. 

The number of incongruent residues prime to m is — 

	*(m)=N(m)n(i-^), 

where the product extends to all prime factors of m. If o> is any 
element of v prime to tn, 

	a*fr(m)=i (mod m). 

Associated with a prime modulus p for which N {v) — p f we have 
<f>(pf — i) primitive roots, where <j> has the meaning given to it in the 
ordinary theory. Hence follow the usual results about exponents, 
indices, solutions of linear congruences, and so on. For any modulus 
m we have N(m) =2<£(b), where the sum extends to all the divisors 
of m. 

48. Every element of v which is not contained in any other ideal 
is an algebraic unit. If the conjugate fields S2, Q' f . . . I*" -1 ) consist 
of t\ real and 2r 2 imaginary fields, there is a system of units 61, €$,... €,, 
where r = ri+r 2 — I, such that every unit in S2 is expressible in the 
form e=p€i a € 2 6 . . . e r ( where p is a root of unity contained in £2 and 
a, b, ... / are natural numbers. This theorem is due to Dirichlet. 

The norm of a unit is +1 or -1 ; and the determination of all the 
units contained in a given field is in fact the same as the solution of a 
Diophantine equation 

	F(fa, &,...*.)«* 1. 

For a quadratic field the equation is of the form h^-nh^—^\, 
and the theory of this is complete; but except for certain special 
cubic corpora little has been done towards solving the important 
problem of assigning a definite process by which, for a given field, a 
system of fundamental units may be calculated. The researches of 
Jacobi, Hermite, and Minkowsky seem to show that a proper exten- 
sion of the method of continued fractions is necessary. 

49. Ideal Classes. — If m is any ideal, another ideal tt can always be 
found such that mn is a principal ideal; for instance, one such 
multiplier is m -1 N(m). Two ideals m ; m' are said to be equivalent 
(m~m') or to belong to the same class, if there is an ideal n such 
that mn, m'n are both principal ideals. It can be proved that two 
ideals each equivalent to a third are equivalent to each other and 
that all ideals in 12 may be distributed into a finite number, h, of 
ideal classes. The class which contains all principal ideals is called 
the principal class and denoted by O. 

If m, n are any two ideals belonging to'the classes A, B respectively, 
then mn belongs to a definite class which depends only upon A, B 
and may be denoted by AB or BA indifferently. Thus the class- 
symbols form an Abelian group of order k, of which O is the unit 
element; and, mutatis mutandis, the theorems of § 37 about com- 
position of classes still hold good. 

The principal theorem with regard to the determination of k is the 
following, which is Dedekind's generalization of the corresponding 
one for quadratic fields, first obtained by Dirichlet. Let 

	fC0=2N(m)-* 
	<*) 

where the sum extends to all ideals m contained in £2; this converges 
so long as the real quantity 5 is positive and greater than 1. Then 
k being a certain quantity which can be calculated when a funda- 
mental system of units is known, we shall have 

	Kh=Lt{(s-i)S(s)}. 

	5—1 

The expression for k is rather complicated, and very peculiar; it 
may be written in the form 

	2 x K 

	K ~ w *fVA| 

where |VA] means the absolute value of the square root of the dis- 
criminant of the field, r\, r* have the same meaning as in § 48, w is 
the number of roots of unity in £2, and R is a determinant of the form 
&(e*)l. of order (ri+rr-i), with elements which are, in a certain 
special sense, " logarithms " of the fundamental units ei, €2, . . . Cf. 

50. The discriminant A enjoys some very remarkable properties. 
Its value is always different from *=i; there can be only a finite 
number of fields which have a given discriminant; and the rational 
prime factors of A(Q) are precisely those rational primes which, in £2, 
arc divisible by the square (or some higher power) of a prime ideal. 
Consequently, every rational prime not contained in A is resolvable, 
in £2, into the product of distinct primes, each of which occurs only 
once. The presence of multiple prime factors in the discriminant 
was the principal difficulty in the way of extending Kummer's 
method to all fields, and was overcome by the introduction of com- 
pound moduli— for this is the common characteristic of Dedekind's 
and Kronecker's procedure. 

51. Normal Fields. — The special properties of a particular field £2 
are closely connected with its relations to the conjugate fields 
£2', £2*, . . . £2< n_1 >. The most important case is when each of the 
conjugate fields is identical with £2: the field is then said to be 
Galoisian or normal. The aggregate R(0, 0', . » . ^ n ~ 1 >) of a!l 
rational functions of 6 and its conjugates is a normal field: hence 
every arithmetical field of order n is either normal, or contained in a 
normal field of a higher order. The roots of an equation /(#)=o 
which defines a normal field are associated with a group of substitu- 
tions: if this is Abelian, the field is called Abelian; if it is cyclic, 
the field is called cyclic. A cyclotomic field is one the elements of 
which are all expressible as rational functions of roots of unity; in 
particular the complete cyclotomic field Cm, of order <£(m), is the 
aggregate of all rational functions of a primitive wth root of unity. 
To Kronecker is due the very remarkable theorem that all Abelian 
(including cyclic) fields are cyclotomic: the first published proof of 
this was given by Weber, and another is due to D. Hilbert. 

Many important theorems concerning a normal field have been 
established by Hilbert. He shows that if £2 is a given normal field 
of order m, and p any of its prime ideals, there is a finite series of 
associated fields £2 Jf Oa, &c, of orders m u m%, &c, such that «<so 
(mod. m*+i), and that if r i = mfm i , ? ri = Vi, a prime ideal in 0*". 
If Qt is thQ last of this series, it is called the field of inertia 
( Trdgheitskorper) for p : next after this comes a nother field of still lower 
order called the resolving field (Zerlegungskorper) for p, and in this field 
there is a prime of the first degree, p* + i, such that pi+i=p*, where 
k = m/mi. In the field of inertia p^i remains a prime, but becomes 
of higher degree; in tt;_i, which is called the branch-field (Ver- 
sweigungskorper) it becomes a power of a prime, and by going on in this 
way from the resolving field to SI, we obtain (I+2) representations 
for any prime ideal of the resolving field. By means of these 
theorems, Hilbert finds an expression for the exact power to which a 
rational prime p occurs in the discriminant of SI, and in other ways 
the structure of SI becomes more evident. It may be observed that 
whem m is prime the whole series reduces to SI and the rational field, 
and we conclude that every prime ideal in SI is of the first or mth 
degree: this is the case, for instance, when m=2, and is one of the 
reasons why quadratic fields are comparatively so simple in character. 

52. Quadratic Fields. — Let m be an ordinary integer different from 
-r-i, and not divisible by any square: then if x t y assume all ordinary 
rational values the expressions x+y-s/m arc the elements of a field 
which may be called ii(Vm). It should be observed that -4 m means 
onedefinite root of x*—m=o, it does not matter which: it is con- 
venient, however, to agree that Vm is positive when m is positive, 
and t*V rn is negative when m is negative. The principal results 
relating to SI will now be stated, and will serve as illustrations of 
§§44-51. 

In the notation previously used 

	fl = [i» J(i+V«)]or[i, V«] 

according as m = i (mod 4) or not. In the first case A = m, in the 
second A —Am. The field SI is normal, and every ideal prime in it is 
of the first degree. 

Let q be any odd prime factor of m; then ff = q*, where q is the 
prime ideal [ff, §(ff-Wm)] when m==i (mod 4) and in other cases 
[ff, V4 An odd prime p of which m is a quadratic residue is the 
(>roduct of two prime ideals p, p', which may be written in the form 
p. i(a+Vm)], \p,\{a — Vwi)] or [p, a+Vw], [p,a-Vm], according as 
m = \ (mod 4) or not: here a is a root of x*=m (mod p), taken so as 
to be odd in the first of the two cases. All other rational odd primes 
are primes in SI. For the exceptional prime 2 there are four cases to 
consider: (i.) if m==i (mod 8), then 2-[2,J(i+Vw)]X[2,J(i— V*h)]. 
(ii.) If wz==5 (mod 8), then 2 is prime: (iii.) if m=2 (mod 4), 
2 = [2,V*wp: (iv.) if m=3 (mod=4), 2 = [2,i+Vm) 2 . Illustrations will 
be found in § 44 for the case m = 23. 

53. Normal Residues. Genera. — Hilbert has introduced a very 
convenient definition, and a corresponding symbol, which is a gene- 
ralization of Legendre's quadratic character. Let n, m be rational 
integers, m not a square, w any rational prime; we write (— — 1 =-|-i 
if, to the modulus w, n is congruent to the norm of an integer con- 
tained in li(V tn) I in all other cases we put f — '— 1 = — I . This new 
symbol obeys a set of laws, among which may be especially noted 
(it) = ^w) = (w) and (^jt) =+i ' whenever w ' m arc P rime 
top. 

Now let a u ffa, . . . ff< be the different rational prime factors of 
the discriminant of 0(V w) '* tnen w * tn anv rational integer a we may 
associate the / symbols 

	f a, m \ / a, m \ / a m \ 

	\ ffi / ' \ ff2 / ' ' ' ' V qt / 

and call them the total character of a with respect to SI. This 
definition may be extended so as to give a total character for every 
ideal a in SI, as follows. First let SI be an imaginary field (m<o); 
we put r—t, n — N(a), and call 

	( n, m \ i n, m \ 

	ffi / * " ' \ ffr / 

the total character of a. Secondly, let SI be a real field; we first 
determine the / separate characters of — 1, and if they are all positive 
we put n= -|-N(a), r — t, and adopt the r characters just written 
above as those of a. Suppose, however, that one of the characters 
of —1 is negative; without loss of generality we may take it to be 
that with reference to q t . We then put r=/ — 1, »=±N(a) taken 
with such a sign that 

	(¥)= +i - 

and takcas the" total character 
of a the symbols f^rr J for 1 = 1, 2,. . .(/— 1). 

With these definitions it can be proved that all ideals of the same 
class have the same total character, and hence there is a distribution 
of classes into genera, each genus containing those classes for which 
the total character is the same (cf. § 36). 

Moreover, we have the fundamental theorem that an assigned set 
of r units * 1 corresponds to an actually existing genus if, and only if, 
their product is -f-i, so that the number of actually existing genera 
is 2 r_1 . This is really equivalent to a theorem about quadratic forms 
first stated and proved by Gauss; the same may be said about the 
next proposition, which, in its natural order, is easily proved by the 
method of ideals, whereas Gauss had to employ the theory of ternary 
quadratics. 

Every class of the principal genus is the square of a class. 

An ambiguous ideal in SI is defined as one which is unaltered by 
the change of Vm to — Vw (that is, it 4 is the same as its conjugate) and 
not divisible by any rational integer except ±1. The only ambi- 
guous prime ideals in SI are those which are factors of its discriminant. 
Putting A = qi 2 q a 2 . . .q t *, there arc in SI exactly 2 l ambiguous ideals: 
namely, those factors of A, including n, which are not divisible by 
any square. It is a fundamental theorem, first proved by Gauss, 
that the number of ambiguous classes is equal to the number of 
genera. 

54. Class- Number. — The number of ideal classes in the field fi(V m) 
may be expressed in the following forms : — 

	(1.) m<o: 
	(ii.) m>o: 
	*-s=(f)« <»-*■* -*■> 
	13?7 ,0 s 
	IT sin 
	II sin -g 

In the first of these formulae t is the number of units contained in 
SI; thus t = 6 for A- — 3, t = 4 for A=— 4, t-2 in other cases. 
In the second formula, € is the fundamental unit, and the products are 

taken for all the numbers of the set (1,2,. . .A) for which (-) — +1, 

( r;) = — 1 respectively. Fn the ideal theory the only way in 

wjhich these formulae have been obtained is by a modification of 
Dirichlet's method; to prove them without the use of transcendental 
analysis would be a substantial advance in the theory. 

55. Suppose that any ideal in SI is expressed in the form [an, «s] ; 
then any element of it is expressible as xwi-\-y<ai, where x, y are 
rational integers, and we shall have N^ (xoji-^-yco^—ax^-^bxy+c^, 
where a, b, c are rational numbers contained in the ideal. If we put 

	x = ax'-\-&y',y = yx'+&y' t

where o, fr 7, 6 are rational numbers such 
that a5— £7==*= 1, we shall have simultaneously (a, b, c) (x, y) 1 
= (a', 6', c') (V, y'Y as in § 32 and also 

where [w'j, w'j] is the same ideal as before. Thus all equivalent forms 
are associated with the same ideal, and the numbers representable 
by forms of a particular class are precisely those which are norms of 
numbers belonging to the associated ideal. Hence the class-number 
for ideals in SI is also the class-number for a set of quadratic forms; 
and it can be shown that all these forms have the same determinant 
A. Conversely, every class of forms of determinant A can be 
associated with a definite class of ideals in fi(Vw), where m=A or 
JA as the case may be. Composition of form-classes exactly 
corresponds to the multiplication of ideals: hence the complete 
analogy between the two theories, so long as they are really in con- 
tact. There is a corresponding theory offorms in connexion with a 
field of order n: the forms are of the order n, but are only very 
special forms of that order, because they are algebraically resolvable 
into the product of linear factors. 

56. Complex Quadratic Forms. — Dirichlet, Smith and others, have 
discussed forms (a, b, c) in which the coefficients are complex integers 
of the form m-\-ni; and Hermite has considered bilinear forms 
axx , +bxy , -\-b'x , y-\-cyy t , where x f , y', b f are the conjugates of x, y, b 
and a, c, are real. Ultimately these theories are connected with 
fields of the fourth order; and of course in the same way we might 
consider forms (a, b, c) with integral coefficients belonging to any 
given field of order n : the theory would then be ultimately connected 
with a field of order 2w. 

57. Kronecker's Method. — In practice it is found convenient to 
combine the method of Dedckind with that of Kroneckcr, the main 
principles of which are as follows. Let F( x, y, s, . . . ) be a poly- 
nomial in any number of indctcrm mates (umbrae, as Sylvester calls 
them) with ordinary integral coefficients; if n is the greatest common 
measure of the coefficients, we have F = nE, where E is a primary or 
unit form. The positive integer n is called the divisor of F; and the 
divisor of the product of two forms is equal to the product of the 
divisors of the factors. Next suppose that the coefficients of F are 
integers in a field SI of order n. Denoting the conjugate forms by 
F', F", . . . FC»-n the product FF/F" . . . F^^/E, where / is a 
real positive integer, and E a unit form with real integral coef- 
ficients. The natural number / is called the norm of F. If F, G 
are any two forms (in SI) we have N(FG)^N(F)N(G). Let the 
coefficients of F be 01, a?, &c, those of G ft, ft, &c, and those of FG 
71, 7», &c; and let p be any prime ideal in SI. Then if p m is the 
highest power of p contained in each of the coefficients a,-, and p* the 
highest power of p contained in each of the coefficients ft, p m+ * is 
the highest power of p contained by the whole set of coefficients 7*. 
Writing dv(ai, a», ...) for the highest ideal divisor of 01, oj, &c, 
this is called the content of F; and we have the theorem that the 
product of the contents of two forms is equal to the content of the 
product of the forms. Every form is associated with a definite ideal 
m, and we have N(F) = N(m) if m is the content of F, and N(m) has 
the meaning already assigned to it. On the other hand, to a given 
ideal correspond an indefinite number of forms of which it is the 
content; for instance (§ 46, end) we can find forms ax+py of which 
any given ideal is the content. 

58. Now let coi, W2, . . . co» be a basis of 0; wi, m 2 , . . . u n a set of 
indeterminates; and 

	£ = o>iWi-|-a>2tt2-f- . . . H-« n w n : 

£ is called the fundamental form of 12. It satisfies the equation 
N(;e-£)=o, or 

	F(x)=x n +Uix n ~ l + . . . +U n = o 

where Ui, U 2 , . . . U« are rational polynomials in «i, u^ . ♦ ,w„ with 
rational integral coefficients. This is called the fundamental 
equation. 

Suppose now that p is a rational prime, and that p~ p°q 6 r e . . . 
where p, q, r, . . . &c, are the different ideal prime factors of p, 
then if F(x) is the left-hand side of the fundamental equation there 
is an identical congruence 

	F(*) HP(*)l a {Q(*)l 5 fR(*)) c . . . (mod p)

where P(x), Q(x) t &c, are prime functions with respect to p. The 
meaning of this is that if we expand the expression on the right-hand 
side of the congruence, the coefficient of every term x l iii m . . . ««' 
will be congruent, mod />, to the corresponding coefficient in F(x), 
If/, g, h, &c, are the degrees of p, q, r, &c. (§ 47), then f,g,k f ... are 
the dimensions in x, u u w 2 ,. . ; u n of the forms of P, Q, R, respectively. 
For every prime p, which is not a factor of A, a = b = c = . . . — 1 
and F(x) is congruent to the product of a set of different prime 
factors, as many in number as there are different ideal prime factors 
ot p. In particular, if p is a prime in 12, F(x) is a prime function 
(mod p) and conversely. 

It generally happens that rational integral values ci, a 2 , . . . a n 
can be assigned to Wi, « 2 , . . . w n such that U„, the last term in the 
fundamental equation, then has a value which is prime to p. Suppos- 
ing that this condition is satisfied, let aiwi+a^-r- . . .+a„to„ = a; 
and let Fi(a) be the result of putting x = a, m»— a» in P(x). Then 
the ideal p is completely determined as the greatest common 
divisor of p and Pi (a) ; and similarly for the other prime factors 
of p. There are, however, exceptional cases when the condition 
above stated is not satisfied. 

59. Cydotomy. — It follows from de Moivre's theorem that the 
arithmetical solution of the equation x m — i =0 corresponds to the 
division of the circumference of a circle into m equal parts. The case 
when m is composite is easily made to depend on that where m is a 
power of a prime; if m is a power of 2, the solution is effected by a 
chain of quadratic equations, and it only remains to consider the 
case when m = q K , a power of an odd prime. It will be convenient to 
write n = <t>(m)=*qK~i(q-i); if we also put r = e2iri/m 1 the primitive 
roots of x m = 1 will be ju in number, and represented by r, r°, r 6 , &c. 
where 1, a, 6, &c, form a complete set of prime residues to the 
modulus m. These will be the roots of an irreducible equation 
/(je)=o of degree^; the symbol f{x) denoting (x m — i)-i-(x m ^ — i). 
There are primitive roots of the congruence xn = i (mod m); let g 
be any one of these. Then if we put r^ = n, we obtain all the roots 
of f(x)=o in a definite cyclical order (n, r 2 . . .*>); and the change 
of r into r° produces a cyclical permutation of the roots. It follows 
from this that every cyclic polynomial in n, , v 2 , . . .?> with rational 
coefficients is equal to a rational number. Thus if we write l+ag 
+&£*+. H-fc^*" 1 =w, we have, in virtue of Th = r° , ri a r 2 6 . . .tv-i*^ 1 = r n , 
and, if we use S to denote cyclical summation, S(ri a r 2 6 . . .*>') = 
f-r-r^-i-. . . H-r^* 1 , the sum of the nth powers of all the roots 
of f{x) =0, and this is a rational integer or zero. Since every cyclic 
polynomial is the sum of parts similar to S(ri a r 2 \ . .?>')» the theorem 
is proved. Now let e, / be any two conjugate factors of ju, so that 
ef~ix, and let 

	Vi=ri+ri+ e +n +2 *+ . . . +r*H/-i> (* = i, 2,. . .e) 

then the elementary symmetric functions £17,-, Xrji7j J \ &c, are cyclical 
functions of the roots ol f(x)=o and therefore have rational values 
which can be calculated: consequently 771, tj 2 , . . .Tj a , which are called 
the/-nomial periods, are the roots of an equation 

	F(i?) ^tf+snTH . . . +c e =o 

with rational integral coefficients. This is irreducible, and defines a 
field of order e contained in the field defined by f(x) =0. Moreover, 
the change of r into r 9 alters w» into ij»+i, and we have the theorem 
that any cyclical function of 171, tj 2 , . . . n, is rational. Now let h, k 
be any conjugate factors of /and put 

	St^ri+ri+Ae+r+^H-. . .r l '+(/-ft) (* = i, 2, 3») 

then

	fi.ft+e, fr+j,. . . $Vkjui>«

will be the roots of an equation 

the coefficients of which are expressible as rational polynomials in 171. 
Dividing k into two conjugate factors, we can deduce from G(f) =0 
another period equation, the coefficients of which are rational poly- 
nomials in 772, ft, and so on. F>y choosing for e, h, &c, the successive 
prime factors of ju, ending up with 2, we obtain a set of equations of 
prime degree, each rational in the roots of the preceding equations, 
and the last having n and rjr 1 for its roots. Thus to take a very 
interesting historical case, let m = 17, so that p = 16 =2 4 , the equations 
are all quadratics, and if we take 3 as the primitive roct of 17, they 
are 

	• 2X'-2rx+(rtf->?+r-3)=o ) p*-x p +i= . 

If two quantities (real or complex) a and b are represented in the 
usual way by points in a plane, the roots of x 2J rax-\-b — o will be 
represented by two points which can be found by a Euclidean con- 
struction, that is to say, one requiring only the use of rule and com- 
pass. ^ Hence a regular polygon of seventeen sides can be inscribed 
in a given circle by means of a Euclidean construction ; a fact first 
discovered by Gauss, who also found the general law, which is that a 
regular polygon of m sides can be inscribed in a circle by Euclidean 
construction if and only if <f>(m) is a power of 2; in other words 
m = 2*P where P is a product of different odd primes, each of which is 
of the form 2 n -f-i. 

Returning to the case m = (f, we shall call the chain of equations 
F(tj) =0, &c, when each is of prime degree, a set of Galoisian auxili- 
aries. We can find different sets, because in forming them we can 
take the prime factors of n in any order we like; but their number 
is always the same, and their degrees always form the same aggregate, 
namely, the prime factors of ju. No other chain of auxiliaries having 
similar properties can be formed containing fewer equations of a given 
prime degree p; a fact first stated by Gauss, to whom this theory is 
mainly due. Thus if m=q* we must have at least (*c— 1) auxiliaries 
of order g, and if q~i =2*pP . . ., we must also have a quadratics, 
equations of order p, and so on. For this reason a set of Galoisian 
auxiliaries may be regarded as providing the simplest solution of the 
equation f(x)=o. 

60. When m is an odd prime p, there is another very interesting 
way of solving the equation (xp-i)-=-(:c-i)=o. As before let 
(n, r 2 , . . . rp_i) be its roots arranged in a cycle by means of a 
primitive root of x^sei (mod p); and let t be a primitive root of 
6"- l = i. Also let 

	0i =ri+€r 2 +€V 5 -f . . . +e*-%_! 
	&~r l +«**+e*r 1 + . . . +r%_, (£ = 2, 3,. . ./>- 2 ) 

so that Ok is derived from 0i by changing e into «*. 

The cyclical permutation (r u r 2 , . . .r p -i) applied to Ok converts 
it into e k 6k\ hence QidijQk+i is unaltered, and may be expressed 
as a rational, and therefore as an integral function of t. It is found 
by calculation that we may put 

	lfc( e )=iS2*= S endm+kindip+i-m) [k = 1, 2 , . . .(p-3)] 

while 

	OiOp~2 = — p* 

In the exponents of ^*(«) the indices are taken to the base g used to 
establish the cyclical order (n, r a . . . ?p_i). Multiplying together the 
(/>— 2) preceding equalities, the result is 

	0i*- l = -MMiMO • - .#p-*(0 =R(0 

where R(«) is a rational integral function of e the degree of which, in 
its reduced form, is less than 4>(p — i). Let p be any one definite root 
of xv~ l = R(e) t and put 0i=p: then since 

	$^ = Mi- • .#fc-i 

we must take 0jfc = pWi& . . . ^*_i=Rft(e)p*, where R*(«) is a 
rational function of e, which we may suppose put into its reduced 
integral form; and finally, by addition of the equations which 
define 0i, 6 2 , &c, 

^-I)r 1 =p+R 2 (0P 2 H-R3WP 5 H-. . • +R^(«)pi^. 
If in this formula we change p into 6~ A p, and n into rji+i, it still 
remains true. 

It will be observed that this second mode of solution employs a 
Lagrangian resolvent 6\ ; considered merely as a solution it is neither 
so direct nor so fundamental as that of Gauss. But the form of the 
solution is very interesting; and the auxiliary numbers ^(«) have 
many curious properties, which have been investigated by Jacobi, 
Cauchy and Kronecker. 

61. When m — q K i the discriminant of the corresponding cyclotomic 
field is =*=g A , where X = g' c ~ I (»cg— k — i). The prime q is equal to q*\ 
where n = tf>(m) ~q K ~ I (q — i), and q is a prime ideal of the first degree. 
If p is any rational prime distinct from g f and/ the least exponent 
such that p f ==i (mod. w),/ will be a factor of ju, and putting m//— e, 
we have /> = pip 2 . . .p«, where pi, p 2 . . . p* are different prime ideals 
each of the /th degree. There are similar theorems lor the case 
when m is divisible by more than one rational prin.e. 

Kummer has stated and proved laws of reciprocity for quadratic 
and higher residues in what are called regular fields, the definition of 
which is as follows. Let the field be R(e 2Tr *^), where p is an odd 
prime ; then this field is regular, and p is said to be a regular prime, 
when h, the number of ideal classes in the field, is not divisible by p. 
Kummer proved the very curious fact that p is regular if, and only if, 
it is not a factor of the denominators of the first \{p— 3) Bernoullian 
numbers. He also succeeded in showing that in the field R(e***7p) 
the equation a p +0 p +7 p = o has no integral solutions whenever h is 
not divisible by p*. What is known as the " last " theorem of Fermat 
is his assertion that if m is any natural number exceeding 2, the 
equation x m +y m — z m has no rational solutions, except the obvious 
ones for which xyz=o. It would be sufficient to prove Fermat's 
theorem for all prime values of m; and whenever Rummer's 
theorem last quoted applies, Fermat's theorem will hold. Fermat's 
theorem is true for all values of m such that2<m<ioi, but no 
complete proof of it has yf t been obtained. 

Hilbert has studied in considerable detail what he calls Kummer 
fields, which are obtained by taking x, a primitive pxh root of unity, 
and y any root of v*— a = o, where a is any number in the field R(x) 
which is not a perfect pth power in that field. The Kummer field is 
then R (x, y)> consisting of all rational functions of x and y. Other 
fields that have been discussed more or less are general cubic fields, 
some special biquadratic and a few Abelian fields not cyclic. 

Among the applications of cyclotomy may be mentioned the 
proof which it affords of the theorem, first proved by Dirichlet, that if 
m t n are any two rational integers prime to each other, the linear 
form mx+n is capable of representing an infinite number of primes. 

62. Gauss's Sums. — Let m be any positive real integer; then 

	2 
	I+* 

This remarkable formula, when m is prime, contains results which 
were first obtained by Gauss, and thence known as Gauss's sums. 
The easiest method of proof is Kronecker's, which consists in finding 

the value oljie^^^dzfti-e*™)), taken round an appropriate 
contour. It will be noticed that one result of the formula is that the 
square root of any integer can be expressed as a rational function of 
roots of unity. 

The most important application of the formula is the deduction 
from it of the law of quadratic reciprocity for real primes: this was 
done by Gauss. 

63. One example may be given ef some remarkable formulae 
giving explicit solutions of representations of numbers by certain 
quadratic forms. I-et p be any odd prime of the form 7n+2; then 
we shall have p-7n-\-2=x t +7f t where x is determined by the 
congruences 

	(3*)i 
	:(mod p)\ x=$ (mod 7). 
	""(»)! (2»)I 

This formula was obtained by Eisenstein, who proved it by investigat- 
ing properties of integers in the field generated by 1/^2117-7=0, 
which is a component of the field generated by seventh root? of unity. 
The first formula of this kind was given by Gauss, and relates to the 
case p = 471 + 1 =x*-f-> a ; he conceals its connexion with complex 
numbers. Probably there are many others which have not yet been 
stated. 

64. Higher Congruences. Functional Moduli. — Suppose that p is 
a real prime, and that /(*), <t>{x) are polynomials in x with rational 
integral coefficient.-. The congruence /(x)=0(x) (mod p) is identical 
when each coefficient of /is congruent, mod^, to the corresponding 
coefficient of 4>. It will be convenient to write, under these circum- 
stances, /— <£(mod P) and to say that f, <f> are equivalent, mod p. 
Every polynomial of degree k is equivalent to another of equal or 
lower degree, which has none of its coefficients negative, and each of 
them less than p. Such a polynomial, with unity for the coefficient 
of the highest power of x contained in it, may be called a reduced 
polynomial with respect to p. There are, in all, p* reduced poly- 
nomials of degree h. A polynomial may or may not be equivalent to 
the product of two others of lower degree than itself; in the latter 
case it is said to be prime. In every case, F being any polynomial, 
there is an equivalence F~c/i/j . . . fi where c is an integer and 
fuftr—fi are prime functions; this resolution is unique. Moreover, 
it follows from Fermat's theorem that (F(*))p~F(^),{F(x))'*_F(*'*), 
and so on. 

As in the case of equations, it may be proved that, whentfte modulus 
ts prime, a congruence /(*)— o ( m °d P) cannot have more incongruent 
roots than the index of the highest power of x in /(*), and that if 
x==£isa solution, /(*)-(*-£) A (i), where fi{x) is another polynomial. 
The solutions of x^=x are all the residuesof£; hence .x*>-x~x(x+i) 
{x+2) . . .(x+p-i), where the right-hand expression is the product 
of all the linear functions which are prime to p. A generalization 
of this is contained in the formula 

	x(x^-^i)^Uf(x) (mod 20 

where the product includes every prime function f{x) of which the 
degree is a factor of m. By a process similar to that employed in 
finding the equation satisfied by primitive wth roots of unity, we 
can find an expre;>sion for the product of all prime functions of a 
given degree w, and prove that their number is {m> 1) 

	~riP m '^P m 
	m 
	•+2/>' 
	f m/o6_ 
	.0 

where a, b> c ... are the different prime factors of m. Moreover, 
if F is any given function, we can find a resolution 
F~cF,F 2 ...F„(mod£) 

where c is numerical, Fi is the product of all prime linear functions 
which divide F, F* is the product of all the prime quadratic factors, 
and so on. 

65. By the functional congruence <f>(x)=^(x) (mod p,f(x)) is meant 
that polynomials U, V can be found such that <t>{x)=${x)+p\J + 
V/(x) identically. We might also write <f>(x)~ip(x) (mod />, f(x)) ; but 
this is not so necessary here as in the preceding case of a simple 
modulus. Let m be tne degree of f(x) ; without loss of generality 
we may suppose that the coefficient cf x"* is unity, and it will be 
further assumed that/(x) is a prime function, mod p. Whatever the 
dimensions of <£(*), there will be definite functions % (*)» <M*) such that 
<*>(*) =/(*)x(*)+<Ai(*) where fa{x) is of lower dimension than f(x); 
moreover, we may suppose <t>i(x) replaced by the equivalent reduced 
function <j>z(x) mod p. Finally then, <>=<>* (med p, f{x)) where <fa is a 
reduced function, mod p, of order not greater than (rw-i). If we 
put p m —n t there will be in all (including zero) n residues to the com- 
pound modulus {py /): let us denote these by Ri, Rj, ...R*. 
Then (cf. § 28) if we reject the one zero residue (K„, suppose) and 
take any function^ of wtiich the residue is not zero, the residues of 
<£>Ri, <£>Rj, . . . <£>R»_i will all be different, and we conclude that 
^«-i= 1 ( moc i p % f)^ Every function therefore satisfies <j> H ~<j> 
(mod p, /); by putting ^=xwe obtain the principal theorem stated 
in § 64. 

A still more comprehensive theory of compound moduli is due to 
Kronecker; it will be sufficiently illustrated by a particular case. 
Let m be a fixed natural number; X, Y, Z, T assigned polynomials, 
with rational integral coefficients, in the independent variables 
x, y % % ; and let U be any polynomial of the same nature as X, Y, Z, T. 
We may write U~o (mod m, X, Y, Z, T) to express the fact that 
there are integral polynomials M, X', Y', Z', T' such that 

U^mM+X'X+VY+Z'Z+TT 

identically. In this notation U~V means that U-V~o. The 
number of independent variables and the number of functions in the 
modulus are unrestricted; there may be no number m in the 
modulus, and there need not be more than one. This theory of 
Kronecker's is admirably adapted for the discussion of all algebraic 
problems of an arithmetical character, and is certain to attain a high 
degree of development. 

It is worth mentioning that one of Gauss's proofs of the law of 
quadratic reciprocity (Gott. Nackr. 1818) involves the principle of a 
compound modulus. 

66. Forms of Higlter Degree. — Except for the case alluded to at the 
end of § 55, the theory of forms of the third and higher degree is still 
quite fragmentary. C. Jordan has proved that the class number is 
finite. H. Poincar6 has discussed the classification of ternary and 
quaternary cubics. With regard to the ternary cubic it is known 
that from any rational solution of /=o we can deduce another by a 
process which is equivalent to finding the tangential of a point 
(*i, yi» Si) on the curve, that is, the point where the tangent at 
(*i. yu zi) meets the curve again. We thus obtain a scries of solutions 
(*i» yu zi). (**. y*t z:). &c.« which may or may not be periodic. E. Lucas 
and J.J. Sylvester have proved that for certain cubics f-o has no 
rational solutions; for instance x*-\-y*-Az? = o has rational solutions 
only if A=a6(a-f*6)/c a , where a, b y c are rational integers. Warine 
asserted that every natural number can be expressed as the sum ol 
not more than 9 cubes, and also as the sum of not more than 19 
fourth powers; these propositions have been neither proved nor 
disproved. 

67. Results derived from Elliptic and Theta Functions. — For the 
sake of reference it will be convenient to give the expressions for the 
four Jacobian theta functions. Let w be any complex quantity such 
that the real part of it* is negative; and let q = c r »«>. Then 

	+00 
	0oo(i>) =2:g i V* ,^ » , = 1 -|-2g cos 2*v+2q* cos 4icv-\-2qf> cos 6*v-f- . . • 
	- 00 
	00 
	= n(i-^*)(i+2g t '- 1 cos 2irv-}-g**-*), 
	1 
	0oi W = 1 -2fl cos 2ri>+2g 4 cos 4*v-2qp cos 6ir»-f- . . • 
	00 
	= n(i -2*0(1 -2g**- 1 cos 2TV+q*-*) t 
	1 
	9\ti{v)-2q} cos irv-t- 2q} cos 3ir»-t-2g v cos 5™+ 
	= 2g l cos rvU{\ -q u )(l +20* cos 2ir»-f-g 4 *)» 
	1 
	0n (u)=2g* sin *v — 2q} sin $*v+2q* sin 5x7 — . . . 
	= 2g l sin TtfSCi-g 2 *) (l-2q u cos 2xv+q u ). 
	1 

Instead of 0oo(o), &c, we write 0«>, &c. Clearly 6 U =0; we have 
the important identities 

	U ' =T0oo0io0oi 0oo 4 =0oi 4 -Hio 4 

where 0n' means the value of d$n(v)ldv fort? = o. If, now, we put 

	V«-2» V/-JS. *=**«>%, 

so that j^+k' 2 ** i, we shall have 

and, supposing for simplicity that *w is a real negative quantity, 

	x0oo 2 =2K, cOT0oO 2 = 2tK', w =tK'/K, 

the notation being that which is now usual for the elliptic functions. 
It is found that 

	— sn2Kw = 22- 
	7T ll 
	£!_ 
	I sin (25— iJttm, 
	Cn 2Km =22— *— 5— rCOS (25— i) 7TM, 
	x I — g" A 
	K 
	9* 
	— dn 2K« = i+22_ 
	7T ii +S 2 * 
	COS 257TM. 

From the last formula, by putting # = o, we obtain 

	i 2 (i+2g+2g 4 +22P+. 
	•) 2 , 

and hence, by expanding both sides in ascending powers of q t and 
equating the coefficients of o", we arrive at a formula for the number 
of ways of expressing n as the sum of two squares. If 5 is any odd 
divisor of n, including I and n itself if n is odd, we find as the co- 
efficient of g" in the expansion of the left-hand side 42(-i)K 6_l) ; 
on the right-hand side the coefficient enumerates all the solutions 
n = ( =fcx) 2 -}- ( =*=y) 2 , taking account of the "different signs (except for o 2 ) 
and of the order in which the terms are written (except when x 2 = v 2 ). 
Thus if n is an odd prime of the form 4&+I, S(-i) i ^~ l) = 2, and the 
coefficient of g" is 8, which is right, because the one possible com- 
position » = a 2 -r-6 2 may be written n = ( =*= a) 2 +(=*= b) 2 = ( = b) 2 + ( =*= a) 2 , 
giving eight representations. 

By methods of a similar character formulae can be found for the 
number of representations of a number as the sum of 4,6, 8 squares 
respectively. The four-square theorem has been stated in § 41 ; the 
eight-square theorem is that the number of representations of a 
number as the sum of eight squares is sixteen times the sum of the 
cubes of its factors, if the given number is odd, while for an even 
number it is sixteen times the excess of the cubes of the even factors 
above the cubes of the odd factors. The five-square and seven- 
square theorems have not been derived from g-senes, but from the 
general theory of quadratic forms. 

68. Still more remarkable results are deducible from the theory of 
the transformation of the theta functions. The elementary formulae 
are 

	0ii(m.«+i) =e w/4 0u(tt,u), 8 l0 (u,o>+i) «e w/4 0io(tt,»), 
	(«, w4-i)=0oo(m,u), 
	■). 
	-jrt«2/(o. 
	'fci 
	fe 
	e-^/^g, 
	Mtt,u + l)=0oi(tt, 
	-) =-t*V -iooMtt, to), 
	to/ 
	I) =V -io>Mtt f w), 
	03/ 
	€*****%>& -I) -V"=^oi(w,to), 
	\03 ' tO/ 

where V — io> is to be taken in such a way that its real part is 
positive. Taking the definition of k given in § 67, and considering 
k as a function ofco, we find 

	ic(u+i) =&io 2 /0oi 2 =tK(«)/x'(w), 
	*("«) -flnVW -«'<«)- 

For convenience let /^(co) = cr: then the substitutions (co,to+i) and 
(w,— w" 1 ) convert cr into a/ (a — 1 ) and (1— a-) respectively. Now if 
a, 0, 7, 5 are any real integers such that a5— &y = i, the substitution 
[co,(aGj+/3)/(7«-j-5)J can be compounded of (co,co+i) and (to,— or 1 ); 
theeffect on a will be the same as if we apply a corresponding substi- 
tution compounded of [cr, <r/(cr — i)J and [cr, I— a]. But these are 
periodic and of order 3, 2 respectively] ; therefore we cannot get more 
than six values of cr, namely 

	1 -a, 
	I cr — I I 
	-I I — cr cr a 

and any symmetrical function of these will have the same value at 
any two equivalent places in the modular dissection (§ 33). Their 
sum is constant, but the sum of their squares may be put into the 
form 

	<7 2 (<7-l) 2 
	— 3; 

hence (a 2 — cr-f-i) s -=-a- 2 (cr — i) 2 has the same value'at equivalent places. 
F. Klein writes 

	_ 4 (^-cr4-l) 3 . 
	J 27<7 2 (<7-l) 2 

this is a transcendental function of to, which is a special case of a 
Fuchsian or automorphic function. It is an analytical function of 
g 2 , and may be expanded in the form 

	J =7^- 2 +744+^+^<+ - - •} 

where c u Oi, &c, are rational integers. 

69. Suppose, now, that a, b, c, d are rational integers, such that 
dv(a, 6, c, d) = I and ad—bc — n y a positive integer. Let (aw+b)] 
(coj+d) =to'; then the equation J (to') =J(co) is satisfied if and only if 
to'~co, that is, if there are integers a,0, 7, 5 such that a5— j8y = i, and 

	(aw+6)(7to+3)-(ao+i)(aco+/3) =0. 

If we write ^(n) ==nll(i +/>~ 1 ), where the product extends to all prime 
factors (p) of n, it is found that the values of to fall into \p{n) equiva- 
lent sets, so that when to is given there are not more than ^(n) 
different values of J(to'). Putting J(co')=J', J(:o)=J, we have a 
modular equation 

	/.(J'.J)=o 

symmetrical in J, J', with integral coefficients and of degree ^(«). 
Similarly when dv(a, b, c, d) = t we have an equation / T (J, J) =0 of 
order ^(n/r 2 ) ; hence the complete modular equation for transforma- 
tions of|4he nth order is 

. F(J'J)=H/r(J',J)=0, m 

the degree of which is <E>(n), the sum of the divisors of n. 

Now if in F(J',J) we put J' = Ji the result is a polynomial in J 
alone, which we may call G(J). To every. linear factor of G corre- 
sponds a class of quadratic forms of determinant (k 2 — 4«) where 
k 2 <4» and k is an integer or zero: conversely from every such form 
we can derive a linear factor (T— a) of G. Moreover, if with each form 
we associate its weight (§ 41) we find that with the notation of § 39 
the degree of G is precisely SH(4n — k 2 ) — e n , where c = i when n 
is a square, and is zero in other cases. But this degree may be found 
in another way as follows. A complete representative set of trans- 
formations of order 
o^b<d; hence 

» is given by to' = (a<o-r-&)/<i, with ad—n, 

	Ga)=n{j(«)-j(2^)}, 

and by substituting for J(to) and J (^r— ) their values in terms of 

q, we find that the lowest term in the factor expressed above is either 
g"*/i728or <f**J d I iy2&, or a constant, according as a<d, a>d or 
a — d. Hence if v is the order of G(J), so that its expansion in q 
begins with a term in q~* y we must have 

	v=X(i-d)+z(Z-d) =>2d+Xa 
	d>\n \ a / rf>Vno>Vn 

	rf>Vn 
	= 22tf 

extending to all divisors of n which exceed -yjn. Comparing this with 
the other value, we have 

	2H(4»-k 2 ) =22d+e n = Hn)+*(n) t 
	K rf>V» 

as stated in § 39. 

70. Each of the singular moduli which are the roots of G(J)=0 
corresponds to exactly one primitive class of definite quadratic forms, 
and conversely. 

Corresponding to every given negative determinant —A there is 
an irreducible equation ^(}")=o, where j = i728J, the coefficients 
of which are rational integers, and the decree of which is h(— A). 
Thecoefficient of the highest power of j is unity, so that j is an arith- 
metical integer, and its conjugate values belong one to each primitive 
class of determinant —A. By adjoining the square roots of the 
prime factors of A the function \f/(j) may be resolved into the product 
of as many factors as there are genera of primitive classes, and the 
degree of each factor is equal to the number of classes in each genus. 
In particular, if {1, I, J(A-f-i)J is the only reduced form for the 
determinant —A, the value of j is a real negative rational cube. At 

the same time its approximate value is exp — 2iri' +744 = 

744— e*"V a, so that, approximately, e^ ^ — m 3 -\- 744 where m is a 
rational integer. For instance c»v <« = 88473674.3-9997775 .. .= 
96o 3 -f-744 very nearly, and for the class (1, 1, n) tne exact value of 
j is-960 3 . Four and only four other similar determinants are known 
to exist, namely — n, —19, —67, —163, although thousands have 
been classified. According to Hermite the decimal part of e*v 163 
begins with twelve nines; in this case Weber has shown that the 
exact value of jis-2 18 "3 8 -5 8 -23 3 "29 3 . 

71. The f unction j(oj) is the most fundamental of a set of quantities 
called class-invariants. Let (a, 6, c) be the representative of any class 
of definite quadratic forms, and let to be the root of ajc 2 +6.r-f-c = o 
which has a positive imaginary part; then F (to) is said to be a class- 
invariant for (a, 6, c) if F ( ac °7]g ) = F(to) for all real integers a 
0, 7» 5 such that a5— £7 = 1. This is true for j(u>) whatever <o may 
be, and it is for this reason that j is so fundamental. But, as will be 
seen from the above examples, the value of j soon becomes so large 
that its calculation is impracticable. Moreover, there is the diffi- 
culty of constructing the modular equation /i(J, J') =0 (§69), which 
has only been done in the cases when n =2, 3 (the latter by Smith in 
Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. ix. p. 242). 

For moderate values of A the difficulty can generally be removed 
by constructing algebraic functions of j. Suppose we have an irre- 
ducible equation 

	x m +cix*»-i+ . .. +^=0, 

the coefficients of which are rational functions of j( w )« If we apply 
any modular substitution a>'=S(to), this leaves the equation un- 
altered, and consequently only permutates the roots among them- 
selves: thus if *i(w) is any definite root we shall have JCi(o/) = 
*»(«), where * may or may not be equal to 1. The group of unitary 
substitutions which leave all the roots unaltered is a factor of the 
complete modular group. If we put y = x(nu>), y will satisfy an equa- 
tion similar to that which defines x, with/ written for 7; hence, since 
j t f are connected by the equation f x U,j') =o, there will be an equation 
tfW >')=<> satisfied by x and y. By suitably choosing x we can in 
many cases find \p(x r y) without knowing /i(j, j'); and then the 
equation ^(x, x) =0 defines a set of singular moduli, each one of which 
belongs to a certain value of *> and all the quantities derived from 
it by the substitutions which leave *(u) unaltered. 

As one of the simplest examples, let »=2, x 3 -J(oj) =y*-j (to') =0. 
Then the equation connecting x t y in its complete form is of the ninth 
degree in each variable; but it can be proved that it has a rational 
factor, namely 

	y*-x*f+w$xy+x*-2 A . 3* . 5 3 = o, 

and tf in this we put x=y = u, the result is 

	« 4 -2m s -495m 2 +2 4 .3 3 .5 2 = o, 

the roots of which are 12, 20,-15,-15. It remains to find the 
values of to, to which they belong. Writing 72(01)= $ j f it is found 
that we may define 72 in such a way that 72(«-f-i) — ^"/^(w), 
7i(-w" 1 )— 7 2 («), whence it is found that 

	72 
	\yo> + 5/ 
	e 2 
	72(w). 
	=72(«) for all values of such that 
	£a5-07 = l, 75+7a-H9$-j857 2 =o (mod 3). 

We shall therefore have 72 (2«) 

	au>-f-0 

Putting (a, 0, 7, 5) = (o, -1, I, o) the conditions are satisfied, and 
2« = j"V2. Now j(i) — 1725, so that 72(0 = 12; and since j(oj) is 
positive for a pure imaginary, 72(^2) =20. The remaining case is 
settled by putting 

	to _ aio-f~ft 

	2 7^+5* 

with a, jS, 7, 5 satisfying the same conditions as before. One solution 
is (-1, 2, 1, 1) and hence to 2 +3to 4-4 = 0, so that 72 ( 2 * ) = " 15 * 

Besides 71, other irrational invariants which have been used with 
effect are 72 = V (J-172&), the moduli k, #c', their square and fourth 
roots, the functions/, /i,/j defined by 

	f=2l(KK')-*»fi = yK' ./,/2-Vk./, 

and the function rj(no>)faM where tj(co) is defined by 

	7/(to)=^ 2 (-l)'2 3; 
	s 2 "*-^- 
	V3^ 1, V3'3 
	y=^^ 
