MYTHOLOGY (Gr. itvOoXoryla, the science which examines 
IwOot, myths or legends of cosmogony and of gods and 
heroes. Mythology is also used as a term for these legends 
themselves. Thus when we speak of " the mythology of Greece " 
we mean the whole body of Greek divine and heroic and cosmo- 
gonic legends. When we speak of the" science of mythology " 
we refer to the various attempts which have been made to 
explain these ancient narratives. Very early indeed in the 
history of human thought men awoke to the consciousness 
that their religious stories were much in want of explanation. 
The myths of civilized peoples, as of Greeks and the Aryans of 
India, contain two elements, the rational and what to modern 
minds seems the irrational. The rational myths are those 
which represent the gods as beautiful and wise beings. The 
Artemis of the Odyssey " taking her pastime in the chase of 
boars and swift deer, while with her the wild wood-nymphs 
disport them, and high over them all she rears her brow, and 
is easily to be known where all are fair," is a perfectly rational 
mythic representation of a divine being. We feel, even now, 
that the conception of a " queen and huntress, chaste and fair," 
the lady warden of the woodlands, is a beautiful and natural 
fancy which requires no explanation. On the other hand, the 
Artemis of Arcadia, who is confused with the nymph Callisto, 
who, again, is said to have become a she-bear, and later a star, 
and the Brauronian Artemis, whose maiden ministers danced 
a bear-dance, are goddesses 'whose * legend seems unnatural, 
and is felt to need explanation. Or, again, there is nothing 
not explicable and natural in the conception of the Olympian 
Zeus as represented by the great chryselephantine statue of 
Zeus at Olympia, or in the Homeric conception of Zeus as a god 
who " turns everywhere his shining eyes " and beholds all 
things. But the Zeus whose grave was shown in Crete, or the 
Zeus who played Demeter an obscene trick by the aid of a ram, 
or the Zeus who, in the shape of a swan, became the father of 
Castor and Pollux, or the Zeus who was merely a rough stone, 
or the Zeus who deceived Hera by means of a feigned marriage 
with an inanimate object, or the Zeus who was afraid of Attes, 
is a being whose myth is felt to be unnatural and in great need 
of explanation. It is this irrational and unnatural element — 
as Max Muller says, " the silly, savage and senseless element " 
— that makes mythology the puzzle which men have so long 
found it. 

Early Explanations of Myths. — The earliest attempts at a 
crude science of mythology were efforts to reconcile the legends 
of the gods and heroes with the religious sentiment which 
recognized in these beings objects of worship, and respect. 
Closely as religion and myth are intertwined, it is necessary 
to hold them apart for the purposes of this discussion. Religion 
may here be defined as the conception of divine, or at least 
supernatural powers entertained by men in moments of gratitude 
or of need and distress, in hours of weakness, when, as Homer 
says, " all folk yearn after the gods." Now this conception 
may be rude enough, and it is nearly related to purely 
magical ideas, to efforts to secure supernatural aid by 
magical ceremonies. Still the roughest form of spiritual 
prayer has for its basis the hypothesis of beneficent beings, 
visible or invisible. The senseless stories or myths about 
the gods are soon felt to be at variance with this hypothesis. 
As an example we may take the instance of Qing, the 
Bushman hunter. Qing, when first he met white men, was 
asked about his religion. He began to explain, and mentioned 
-Cagn. Mr Orpen, the chief magistrate of St John's Terri- 
tory, asked: " Is Cagn good or malicious? how do you pray 
to him?" Answer (in a low imploring tone): " 'O Cagn! 
O Cagn! are we not your children? do you not see our hun- 
ger? give us food;' and he gives us both hands full " (Cape 
Monthly Magazine, July 1874). Here we see the religious 
view t of Cagn, the Bushman god. But in the mythological 
account of Cagn given by Qing he appears as a kind of grass- 
hopper, supernaturally endowed, the hero of a most absurd 
cycle of senseless adventures. Even religion is affected by these 
irrational /lotions, and the gods of savages and of many civilized 
peoples are worshipped with cruel, obscene, and irrational 
rites. But, on the whole, the religious sentiment strives to 
transcend the mythical conceptions of the gods, and is shocked 
and puzzled by the mythical narratives. As soon as this sense 
of perplexity is felt by poets, by priests, or by most men in an 
age of nascent criticism, explanations of what is most crude and 
absurd in the myths are put forward. Men ask themselves 
why their gods are worshipped in the form of beasts, birds, and 
fishes; why their gods are said to have prosecuted their amours 
in bestial shapes; why they are represented as lustful and passion- 
ate^ — thieves, robbers, murderers and adulterers. The answers 
to these questions sometimes become myths themselves. Thus 
both the Mangaians and the Egyptians have been puzzled by 
their own gods in the form of beasts. The Egyptians invented an 
explanation — itself a myth — that in some moment of danger 
the gods concealed themselves from their foes in the shapes 
of animals. 1 .The Mangaians, according to W. W. Gill, hold 
that " the heavenly family had taken up their abode in these 
birds, fishes, and reptiles." 2 

t A people so curious and refined as the Greeks were certain 
to be greatly perplexed by even such comparatively pure 
mythical narratives as they found in Homer, still more by 
the coarser legends of Hesiod, and above all by the ancient 
local myths preserved by local priesthoods. Thus, in the 6th 
century before Christ, Xenophanes of Colophon severely blamed 
the poets for their unbecoming legends, and boldly called certain 
myths "the fables of men of old." 3 Theagenes of Rhegium 
(520 B.C.?), according to the scholiast on Iliad, xx. 67,* was the 
author of a very ancient system of mythology. Admitting 
that the fable of the battle of the gods was " unbecoming," if 
literally understood, Theagenes represented it as an allegorical* 
account of the war of the elements. Apollo, Helios, and 
Hephaestus were fire, Hera was air, Poseidon was water, Artemis 
was the moon, wu ra Xowrd ojlwhojs. Or, by another system, the 
names of the gods represented moral and intellectual qualities. 
Heraclitus, too, disposed of the myth of the bondage of Hera 
as allegorical philosophy. Socrates, in the Cratylus of Plato, 
expounds " a philosophy which came to him all in an instant," 
an explanation of the divine beings based on crude philological 
analyses of their names. Metrodorus, rivalling some recent 
flights of conjecture, resolved not only the gods but even heroes 
like Agamemnon, Hector and Achilles " into elemental combina- 
tions and physical agencies." 5 Euripides makes Pentheus 
(but he was notoriously impious) advance a " rationalistic " 
theory of the story that Dionysus was stitched up in the thigh 
of Zeus. 

^ When Christianity became powerful the heathen philosophers 
evaded its satire by making more and more use of the allegorical 
and non-natural system of explanation. That method has 
two faults. First (as Arnobius and Eusebius reminded their 
heathen opponents), the allegorical explanations are purely 
arbitrary, depend upon the fancy of their author, and are 
all equally plausible and equally unsupported by evidence. 6 
Secondly, there is no proof at all that, in the distant age when 
the myths were developed, men entertained the moral notions 
and physical philosophies which are supposed to be " wrapped 
up, " as Cicero says, " in impious fables." Another system of 
explanation is that associated with the name of Euemerus 
(316 B.C.). According to this author, the myths are history 
in disguise. All the gods were once men, whose real feats have 
been decorated and distorted by later fancy. This view suited 
Lactantius, St Augustine and other early Christian writers 

	1 Plutarch, De hide et Osiride. 

	1 Myths and Songs from the South Pacific, p. 35 (1876). 
	* Xenoph. Fr. i. 42. * Dindorfsed., iv, 231. 

	5 Grote, Hist, of Greece, (ed. 1869) i. 404. 
	b 6 Cf. Lobeck. Aglaophamus, i. 151-152, on allegorical interpreta- 
	tion of myths in the mysteries. 

very well. They were pleased to believe that Euemerus " by 
historical' research had ascertained that the gods were once but 
mortal men." Precisely the same convenient line was taken 
by Sahagun in his account of Mexican religious myths. As 
there can be no doubt that the ghosts of dead men have been 
worshipped in 'many lands, and as the gods of many faiths are 
tricked out with attributes derived from ancestor-worship, 
the system of Euemerus retains some measure of plausibility: 
While we need not believe with Euemerus and with Herbert 
Spencer that the god of Greece or the god of the Hottentots 
was once a man, we cannot deny that the myths of both these 
gods have passed through and been coloured by the imaginations 
of men who practised the worship of real ancestors. For 
example, the Cretans showed the tomb of Zeus, and the Phocians 
(Pausanias x. 5) daily poured blood of victims into the tomb 
of a hero, obviously by way of feeding his ghost. The 
Hottentots show many tombs of their god, Tsui-Goab, and tell 
tales about his death; they also pray regularly for aid at the 
tombs of their own parents. 1 We may therefore say that, 
while it is rather absurd to believe that Zeus and Tsui-Goab 
were once real men, yet their myths are such as would be 
developed by people accustomed, among other forms of religion, 
to the worship of dead men. Very probably portions of the 
legends of real men have been attracted into the mythic accounts 
of gods of another character, and this is the element of truth 
at the bottom of Euemerism. 

Later Explanations of Mythology. — The ancient systems of 
explaining what needed explanation in myths were, then, 
physical, ethical, religious and historical. One student, like 
Theagenes, would see a physical philosophy underlying Homeric 
legends. Another, like Porphyry, would imagine that the 
meaning was partly moral, partly of a dark theosophic and 
religious character. Another would detect moral allegory 
alone, and Aristotle expresses the opinion that the myths were 
the inventions of legislators " to persuade the many, and to 
be used in support of law " (Met. xi. 8, 19). A fourth, like 
Euemerus, would get rid of the supernatural element altogether, 
and find only an imaginative rendering of actual history. When 
Christians approached the problem of heathen mythology, 
they sometimes held, with St Augustine, a form of the doctrine 
of Euemerus. 2 In other words, they regarded Zeus, Aphrodite 
and the rest as real persons, diabolical not divine.'" Some later 
philosophers, especially of the 17th century, misled by the resem- 
■ blance between Biblical narratives and ancient myths, came to 
the conclusion that the Bible contains a pure, the myths a 
distorted, form of an original revelationH The abbe Banier 
published a mythological compilation in which he systematically 
resolved all the Greek myths into ordinary history. 3 Bryant 
published (1774) -4 New System, or an Analysis of Ancient 
Mythology >, wherein an Attempt is made to divest Tradition of Fable, 
in which he talked very learnedly of " that wonderful people, the 
descendants of Cush," and saw everywhere symbols of the ark 
and traces of the Noachian deluge. Thomas Taylor, at the end 
of the 18th century, indulged in much mystical allegorizing 
of myths, as in the notes to his translation of Pausanias (1794). 
At an earlier date (1760) De Brosses struck on the true line of 
interpretation in his little work Du Culte des dieux fetiches, 
ou parallble de Vancienne religion de l'£gypte avec la religion 
actuelle de Nigritie. In this tract De Brosses explained the 
animal-worship of the Egyptians as a survival among a 
civilized people of ideas and practices springing from the 
intellectual condition of savages, and actually existing among 
negroes. A vast symbolical explanation of myths and mysteries 
was attempted by Friedrich Creuzer. 4 The learning and sound 
.sense of Lobeck, in his Aglaophamus, exploded the idea that the 
Eleusinian and other mysteries revealed or concealed matter 
of momentous religious importance. It ought not to be forgotten 

	1 Hahn, Tsuni-Goam f the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi t p. 113. 

	* De civ. dei. % vii. 18; viii. 26. 

	* La Mythologie et les fables explique'es par Vhistoire (Paris, 1738; 
	3 vols. 4to). 

	4 Symbolik und Mythologie der alien Volker (Leipzig and Darm- 
	stadt, 1836-1843). 

	xix. 5 

that Lafitau, a Jesuit missionary in North America, while 
inclined to take a mystical view of the secrets concealed 
by Iroquois myths, had also pointed out the savage element 
surviving in Greek mythology. 5 

Recent Mythological Systems. — Up to a very recent date 
students of mythology were hampered by orthodox traditions, 
and still more by ignorance of the ancient languages and of 
the natural history of man. Only recently have Sanskrit and 
the Egyptian and Babylonian languages become books not 
absolutely sealed. Again, the study of the evolution. of human 
institutions from the lowest savagery to civilization is essentially 
a novel branch of research, though ideas derived from an 
unsystematic study of anthropology are at least as old as 
Aristotle.' The new theories of mythology are based on the 
belief that " it is man, it is human thought and human 
language combined, which naturally and necessarily pro- 
duced the strange conglomerate of ancient fable." 6 *But, while 
there is now universal agreement so far, modern mythologists 
differed essentially on one point. There was a school (with 
internal divisions) which regarded ancient fable as almost 
entirely " a disease of language," that is, as the result of con- 
fusions arising from misunderstood terms that have survived in 
speech after their original significance was lost. Another school 
(also somewhat divided against itself) believes that misunder- 
stood language played but a very slight part in the evolu- 
tion of mythology, and that the irrational element in myths 
is merely the survival from a condition of thought which was 
once common, if not universal, but is now found chiefly among 
savages, and to a certain extent among children. The former 
school considered that the state of thought out of which myths 
were developed was produced by decaying language; the latter 
maintains that the corresponding phenomena of language were 
the reflection of thought. For the sake of brevity we might 
call the former the " philological " system, as it rests chiefly 
on the study of language, while the latter might be styled the 
" historical " or " anthropological " school, as it is based on 
the study of man in the sum of his manners, ideas and insti- 
tutions. 

The System of Max Muller. — The most distinguished and popular 
advocate of the philological 'school was Max Muller, whose views 
may be found in his Selected Essays and Lectures on Language. The 
problem was to explain what he calls " the silly, savage and senseless 
element " in mythology (SeL Ess. 1. 578^. Max Miiller says (speaking 
of the Greeks), " their poets had an instinctive aversion to every- 
thing excessive or monstrous, yet they would relate of their gods 
what would make the most savage of Red Indians creep and 
shudder " — stories, that is, of the cannibalism of Demeter, of the 
mutilation of Uranus, the cannibalism of Cronus, who swallowed 
his own children, and the like. " Among the lowest tribes of Africa 
and America we hardly find anything more hideous and revolting." 

Max Muller refers the beginning of his system of mythology to 
the discovery of the connexion of the Indo-European or, as they 
are called, " Aryan " languages. Celts, Germans, speakers of 
Sanskrit and Zend, Latins and Greeks, all prove by their languages 
that their tongues may be traced to one family of speech. The 
comparison of the various words which, in different forms, are com- 
mon to all Indo-European^ languages must inevitably throw much 
light on the original meaning of these words. Take, for example, 
the nameof a god, Zeus, or Athene, or any other. The word may 
have no intelligible meaning in Greek, but its counterpart in the 
allied tongues, especially in Sanskrit or Zend, may reveal the original 
significance of the terms. " To understand the origin and meaning 
ofthe names of the Greek gods, and to enter into the original intention 
of the fables told of each, we must take into account the collateral 
evidence supplied by Latin, German, Sanskrit and Zend philology " 
(Led. on Lang., 2nd series, p. 406). A name may be intelligible in 
Sanskrit which has no sense in Greek. Thus Athene is a divine name 
without meaning in Greek, but Max Muller advances reasons for 
supposing that it is identical with ahana, " the dawn," in Sanskrit. 
It is his opinion, apparently, that whatever story is told of Athene 
must have originally been told of the dawn, and that we must keep 
this before us in attempting to understand the legends of Athene. 
Thus again (op. cit. p. 410), he says, ,( we have a right to explain 
all that is told of him (Agni, " fire ") " as originally meant for fire." 
The system is simply this: the original meaning of the names of gods 
must be ascertained by comparative philology. The names, as a 
rule, will be found to denote elemental phenomena. And the silly, 

	1 ■ " ■ ' * ■■' — '• ■■ ■ " ■ -■ ' ■ - 

	fi Mceurs des sauvages (Paris, 1724). 

	6 Max Muller, Lectures on Language (1864), 2nd series, p. 410. 

savage and senseless elements in the legends of the gods will be shown 
to have a natural significance, as descriptions of sky, storms, sunset, 
water, fire, dawn, twilight, the life of earth, and other celestial and 
terrestrial existences. Stated in the barest form, these results do 
not differ greatly from the conclusions of Theagenes of Rhegium, 
who held that " Hephaestus was fire, Hera was air, Poseidon was 
water, Artemis was tne moon, Kal tA Xoixd 6/w(a>s." But Max Muller's 
system is based on scientific philology, not on conjecture, and is 
supported by a theory of the various processes in the evolution of 
myths out of language. 

It is no longer necessary to give an elaborate analysis of this theory, 
because neither in its philological nor mythological side has it any 
advocates who need be reckoned with. The attempt to disengage 
the history of times forgotten and unknown, by means of analysis 
of roots and words in Aryan languages, has been unsuccessful, or 
has at best produced disputable results. Max Muller's system was a 
result of the philological theories that indicated the linguistic unity 
of the Indo-European or " Aryan " peoples, and was founded on an 
analysis of their language. But myths precisely similar in irrational 
and repulsive character, even in minute details, to those of the 
Aryan races, exist among Australians, South Sea Islanders, Eskimo, 
Bushmen in Africa, among Solomon Islanders, Iroquois, and so 
forth. The facts being identical, an identical explanation should 
be sought, and, as the languages in which the myths exist are essen- 
tially different, an explanation founded on the Aryan language is 
likely to prove too narrow. Once more, even if we discover the 
original meaning of a god's name, it does not follow that we can 
explain by aid of the significance of the name the myths about the 
god. For nothing is more common than the attraction of a more 
ancient story into the legend of a later god or hero. Myths of un- 
known antiquity, for example, have been attracted into the legend 
of Charlemagne, just as the bons mots of old wits are transferred 
to living humorists. Therefore, though we may ascertain that Zeus 
means " sky " and Agni " fire," we cannot assert, with Max Muller, 
that all the myths about Agni and Zeus were originally told of 
fire and sky. When*these gods became popular they would inevit- 
ably inherit any current exploits of earlier heroes or gods. These 
exploits would therefore be explained erroneously if regarded as 
originally myths of sky or fire. We cannot convert Max M tiller's 
proposition " there was nothing told of the sky that could not in 
some form or other be ascribed to Zeus" into there was nothing 
ascribed to Zeus that had not at some time or other been told of the 
sky." This is also, perhaps, the proper place to observe that names 
derived from natural phenomena— sky, clouds, dawn and sun — 
are habitually assigned by Brazilians, Ojibways, Australians and 
other savages to living menand women. Thus the story originally 
told of a man or woman bearing the name " sun," " dawn," " cloud, 
may be mixed up later with myths about the real celestial dawn, 
cloud or sun. For all these reasons the information obtained from 
philological analysis of names is to be distrusted. We must also 
bear in mind that early men when they conceived, and savage men 
when they conceive, of the sun, moon, wind, earth, sky and so forth, 
have no such ideas in their minds as we attach to these names. 
They think of sun, moon, wind, earth and sky as of living human 
beings with bodily parts and passions. Thus, even when we dis- 
cover an elemental meaning in a god's name, that meaning may be 
all unlike what the word suggests to civilized men. A final objection 
is that philologists differ widely as to the true analysis and real 
meaning of the divine names. Max Muller, for example, connects 
Kronos (Kp6vos) with jcp6vos t "time"; Preller with Kpatvoo, "I fulfil," 
and so forth. 

The civilized men of the Mythopoeic age were not obliged, as 
Max Muller held, to believe that all phenomena were persons, 
because the words which denoted the phenomena had gender- 
terminations. On the other hand, the gender-terminations were 
survivals from an early stage of thought in which personal character- 
istics, including sex, had been attributed to all phenomena. This 
condition of thought is demonstrated to be, and to have been, 
universal among savages, and it may notoriously be observed among 
children. Thus Max Muller's theory that myths are " a disease of 
language " seems destitute of evidence, and inconsistent with what 
is historically known about the relations between the language and 
the social, political and literary condition of men. 

Theory of Herbert Spencer.— The system of Herbert Spencer, as 
explained in Principles of Sociology \ has many points in common 
with that of Max Muller. Spencer attempts to account for the state 
of mind (the foundation of myths) in which man personifies and 
animates all phenomena. According to his theory, too, this habit 
of mind may be regarded as the result of degeneration, for in his 
view, as in Max Muller's, it is not primary, but the result of miscon- 
ceptions. But, while language is the chief cause of misconceptions 
with Max Muller, with Spencer it is only one of several forces all 
working to the same result. Statements which originally had a 
different significance are misinterpreted, he thinks, and names of 
human beings are also misinterpreted in such a manner that early 
races are gradually led to believe in the personality of phenomena. 
He too notes " the defect in early speech " — that is, tne " lack of 
words free from implications of vitality " — as one of the causes 
which " favour personalization." Here, of course, we have to ask 
Spencer, with Max Muller, why words in early languages " imply 
vitality." These words must reflect the thought of the men who use 
them before they react upon that thought and confirm it in its mis- 
conceptions. So far Spencer seems at one with the philological 
school of mycologists, but he warns us that the misconstructions 
of language in his system are" different inland, and the erroneous 
course of thought is opposite in direction." According to Spencer 
(and his premises, at least, are correct), the names of human beings 
in an early state of society are derived from incidents of the moment, 
and often refer to the period of the day or the nature of the weather. 
We find, among Australian natives, among Abipones in South 
America, and among Ojibways in the North, actual people named 
Dawn.Gold Flower of Day, Dark Cloud, Sun, and so forth. Spencer's 
argument is that, given a story about real people so named, in process 
of time and forgetfulness the anecdote which was once current 
about a man named Storm and a woman named Sunshine will be 
transferred to the meteorological phenomena of sun and tempest. 
Thus these purely natural agents will come to be " personalized " 
(Prin. Soc. 392), and to be credited with purely human origin and 
human adventur.es. Another misconception would arise when men 
had a tradition that they came to their actual seats from this moun- 
tain, or that lake or river, or from lands across the sea. They will 
mistake this tradition of local origin for one of actual parentage, 
and will come to believe that, like certain Homeric heroes, they are 
the sons of a river (now personified), or of a mountain, or, like a 
tribe mentioned by Garcilasso de la Vega, that they are descended 
from the sea. Once more, if their old legend told them that they 
came from the rising sun, they will hold, like many races, that they 
are actually the children of the sun. By this process of forgetfulness 
and misinterpretation, mountains, rivers, lakes, sun and sea would 
receive human attributes, while men would degenerate from a more 
sensible condition into a belief in the personality and vitality of 
inanimate objects. As Spencer thinks ancestor-worship the first 
form of religion, and as he holds that persons with such names as 
sun, moon and the like became worshipped as ancestors, his theory 
results in the belief that nature- worship and the myths about natural 
phenomena — dawn, wind, sky, night and the rest — are a kind of 
transmuted worship of ancestors and transmuted myths about real 
men and women. " Partly by confounding the parentage of the 
race with a^ conspicuous object marking the natal region of the race, 
partly by literal interpretation of birth names, and partly by literal 
interpretation of names given in eulogy " (such as Sun and Bull, 
among the Egyptian kings), and also through " implicit belief in 
the statements of forefathers," there has been produced belief in 
descent from mountains, sea, dawn, from animals which have become 
constellations, and from persons once on earth who now appear 
as sun and moon. A very common class of myths (see Totemism) 
assures us that certain stocks of men are descended from beasts, 
or from gods in the shape of beasts. Spencer explains these by the 
theory that the remembered ancestor of a stock had, as savages 
often have, an animal name, as Bear, Wolf, Coyote, or what not. 
In time his descendants came to forget that the name was a mere 
name, and were misled into the opinion that they were children of a 
real coyote, wolf or bear. This idea, once current, would naturally 
stimulate and diffuse the belief that such descents were possible, 
and that the animals are closely akin to men. 

The chief objection to these processes is that they require, as a 
necessary condition, a singular amount of memory on the one hand 
and of forgetfulness on the other. The lowest contemporary savages 
remember little or nothing of any ancestor farther back than the 
grandfather. But men in Spencer's Mythopoeic age had much 
longer memories. On the other hand, the most ordinary savage 
does not misunderstand so universal a custom as the imposition of 
names peculiar to animals or derived from atmospheric phenomena. 
He calls his own child Dawn or Cloud, his own nameis Sitting Bull 
or Running Wolf, and he is not tempted to explain his great-grand- 
father's name of Bright Sun or Lively Raccoon on the hypothesis 
that the ancestor really was a raccoon or the sun. Moreover, 
savages do not worship ancestresses or retain lively memories of 
their great-grandmothers, yet it is through the female line in the 
majority of cases that the animal or other ancestral name is derived. 
The son of an Australian male, whose kin or totem name is Crane, 
takes, in many tribes, his mother's kin-name, Swan or Cockatoo, 
or whatever it may be, and the same is a common rule in Africa and 
America among races who rarely remember their great-grandfathers. 
On the whole, then (though degeneracy, as well as progress, is a 
force in human evolution), we are not tempted to believe in so strange 
a combination of forgetfulness with long memory, nor so excessive 
a degeneration from common sense into a belief in the personality 
of phenomena, as are required no less by Spencer's system than by 
that of Max Muller. 

Preliminary Problems. — We have stated and criticized the 
more prominent modern theories of mythology. It is now 
necessary first to recapitulate the chief points in the problem, 
and then to attempt to explain them by a comparison of the 
myths of various races. The difficulty of mythology is to 
account for the following among other apparently irrational 
elements in myths: the wild and senseless stories of the 
beginnings of things, of the origin of men, sun, stars, animals, 
death, and the world in general; the infamous and absurd adven- 
tures of the gods; why divine beings are regarded as incestuous, 
adulterous, murderous, .thievish, cruel, cannibals, and addicted to 
wearing the shapes of animals, and subject to death in some 
stories; the myths of metamorphosis into plants, beasts and 
stars; the repulsive stories of the state of the dead; the descents 
of the gods into the place of the dead, and their return thence. It 
is extremely difficult to keep these different categories of myths 
separate from each other. If we investigate myths of the origin 
of the world, we often find gods in animal form active in the 
work of world-making. If we examine myths of human descent 
from animals, we find gods busy there, and if we try to investigate 
the myths of the origin of the gods, the subject gets mixed up 
with the mythical origins of things in general. 

Our first question will be, Is there any stage of human society, 
and of the human intellect, in which facts that appear to us 
to be monstrous and irrational are accepted as ordinary occur- 
rences of every day life ? E. W. Lane, in his preface to the 
Arabian Nights, says that the Arabs have an advantage over 
us as story-tellers. They can introduce such incidents as the 
change of a man into a horse, or of a woman into a dog, or the 
intervention of an afreet, without any more scruple than our 
own novelists feel in describing a duel or the concealment of 
a will. Among the Arabs the actions of magic and of spirits 
are regarded as at least as probable and common as duels and 
concealments of wills in European society. It is obvious that 
we need look no farther for the explanation of the supernatural 
events in Arab romances. Now let us apply this system to 
mythology. It is admitted that Greeks, Romans, Aryans of 
India in the age of the Sanskrit commentators, Egyptians of 
the Ptolemaic and earlier ages, were as much puzzled as we are 
by the mythical adventures of their gods. But is there any 
known stage of the human intellect in which these divine 
adventures, and the metamorphoses of men into animals, trees, 
stars, and converse with the dead, and all else that puzzles us 
in the civilized mythologies, are regarded as possible incidents 
of daily human life? Our answer is that everything in the 
civilized mythologies which we regard as irrational seems only 
part of the accepted and rational order of things (at least in 
the case of " medicine-men " or magicians) to contemporary 
savages, and in the past seemed equally rational and natural 
to savages concerning whom we have historical information. 
Our theory is, therefore, that the savage and senseless element in 
mythology is, for the most part, a legacy from ancestors of 
the civilized races who were in an intellectual state not higher 
than that of Australians, Bushmen, Red Indians, the lower races 
of South America, Mincopies, and other worse than barbaric 
peoples. As the ancestors of the Greeks, with the Aryans of 
India, the Egyptians, and others advanced in civilization, 
their religious thought was shocked and surprised by myths 
(originally dating from the period of savagery, and natural 
in that period) which were preserved down to the time of 
Pausanias by local priesthoods, or which were stereotyped in 
the ancient poems of Hesiod and Homer, or in the Brahmanas 
' and Vedas of India, or were retained in the popular religion 
of Egypt. This theory recommended itself to Lobeck. " We 
may believe that ancient and early tribes framed gods like 
themselves in action and in experience, and that the allegorical 
element in myths is the addition of later peoples who had 
attained to purer ideas of divinity, yet dared not reject the 
religion of their ancestors " (Aglaoph. i. 153). The senseless 
element in the myths would by this theory be for the most part 
a " survival." And the age and condition of human thought 
from which it survived would be one in which our most ordinary 
ideas about the nature of things and the limits of possibility 
did not yet exist, when all things were conceived of in quite 
other fashion — the age, that is, of savagery. It is universally 
admitted that " survivals " of this kind do account for many 
anomalies in out institutions, in law, politics, society, even in 
dress and manners. If isolated fragments of an earlier age 
abide in these, it is still more probable that other fragments 
will survive in anything so closely connected as mythology 
with the conservative religious sentiment. 

If this view of mythology can be proved, much will have been 
done to explain a problem which we .have not yet touched, namely, 
the distribution of myths. The science of mythology has to account, 
if it can, not only for the existence of certain stories in the legends 
of certain races, but also for the presence of stories practically 
the same among almost all races. In the long history of mankind 
it is impossible to deny that stories may conceivably have 
spread from a single centre, and been handed on from races like 
the Indo-European and the Semitic to races as far removed 
from them in every way as the Zulus, the Australians, the 
Eskimo, the natives of the South Sea Islands. But, while the 
possibility of the diffusion of myths by borrowing and 
transmission must be allowed for, the hypothesis of the 
origin of myths in the -savage state of the intellect supplies 
a ready explanation of their wide diffusion. Archaeologists 
are acquainted with objects of early art and craftsmanship, 
rude clay pipkins and stone weapons, which can only be classed 
as " human," and which do not bear much impress of any one 
national taste and skill. Many myths may be called " human " 
in this sense. They are the rough products of the early human 
mind, and are not yet characterized by the differentiations 
of race and culture. Such myths might spring up anywhere 
among untutored men, and anywhere might survive into civilized 
literature. Therefore where similar myths are found among 
Greeks, Australians, Egyptians, Mangaians and others, it is 
unnecessary to account for their wide diffusion by any hypothesis 
of borrowing, early or late. The Greek " key " pattern found 
on objects in Peruvian graves was not necessarily borrowed 
from Greece, nor did Greeks necessarily borrow from Aztecs 
the " wave " pattern which is common to both. The same 
explanation may be applied to Greek and Aztec myths of the 
deluge, to Australian and Greek myths of the original theft 
of fire. Borrowed they may have been, but they may as probably 
have been independent inventions. 

It is true that some philologists deprecate as unscientific the com- 
parison cf myths which are found in languages not connected with 
each other. The objection rests on the theory that myths are a 
disease of language, a morbid offshoot of language, and that the 
legends in unconnected languages must therefore be kept apart. 
But, as the theory which we are explaining does not admit that 
language is^ more than a subordinate cause in the development of 
myths, as it seeks for the origin of myths in a given condition of 
thought through which all races have passed, we need do no more 
than record the objection. 

The Intellectual Condition of Savages* — Our next step must 
be briefly to examine the intellectual condition of savages, 
that is, of races varying from the condition of the Andaman 
Islanders to that of the Solomon Islanders and the ruder Red 
Men of the American continent. In a developed treatise on the 
subject of mythology it would be necessary to criticize, with 
a minuteness which is impossible here, our evidence for the 
very peculiar mental condition of the lower races. Max Miiller 
asked (when speaking of the mental condition of men when 
myths were developed), " was there a period of temporary 
madness through which the human mind had to pass, and was 
it a madness identically the same in the south of India and the 
north of Iceland? " To this we may answer that the human 
mind had to pass through the savage stage of thought, that this 
stage was for all practical purposes " identically the same " 
everywhere, and that to civilized observers it does resemble 
" a temporary madness." Many races are still abandoned to 
that temporary madness; many others which have escaped 
from it were observed and described while still labouring under 
its delusions. Our evidence for the intellectual ideas of man 
in the period of savagery we derive partly from the reports of 
voyagers, historians, missionaries, partly from an examination 
of the customs, institutions, and laws in which the lower races 
gave expression to their notions. 

As to the first kind of evidence, we must be on our guard against 
several sources of error. Where religion is concerned, travellers 
in general and missionaries in particular are biased in several distinct 
ways. The missionary is sometimes anxious to prove that religion 
can only come by revelation, and that certain tribes, having received 
no revelation, have no religion or religious myths at all. Sometimes 
the missionary, on the other hand, is anxious to demonstrate that 
the myths of his heathen flock are a corrupted version of the Biblical 
narrative. In the former case he neglects the study of savage 
myths; in the latter he unconsciously accommodates what he hears 
to what he calls " the truth." The traveller who is not a missionary 
may either have the same prejudices, or he may be a sceptic about 
revealed religion. In the latter case he is perhaps unconsciously 
moved to put burlesque versions of Biblical stories into the mouths 
of his native informants, or to represent the savages as ridiculing 
the Scriptural traditions which he communicates to them. Yet 
again we must remember that the leading questions of a European 
inquirer may furnish a savage with a thread on which to string 
answers which the questions themselves have suggested. " Have 
you ever had a great flood ? " " Yes " " Was any one saved ? " 
The question starts the invention of the savage on a deluge-myth, 
of which, perhaps, the idea has never before entered his mind. There 
still remain the difficulties of all conversation between civilized 
men and unsophisticated savages, the tendency to hoax, and other 
sources of error and confusion. By this time, too, almost every 
explorer of savage life is a theorist. He is a Spencerian, or a believer 
in the universal prevalence of the faith in an " All-Father," or he 
looks everywhere for gods who are " spirits of vegetation." In 
receiving this kind of evidence, ther, we need to know the character 
of our informant, his means of communicating with the heathen, 
his power of testing evidence, and his good faith. His testimony 
will have additional weight if supported by the " undesigned coin- 
cidences " of other evidence, ancient and modern. If Strabo and 
Herodotus and Pomponius Mela, for example, describe a custom, 
rite or strange notion in the Old World, and if mariners and mission- 
aries find the same notion or custom or rite in Polynesia or Australia 
or Kamchatka, we can scarcely doubt the truth of the reports. 
The evidence is best when given by ignorant men, who are astonished 
at meeting with an institution which ethnologists are familiar with 
in other parts of the world. 

Another method of obtaining evidence is by the comparative 
study of savage laws and institutions. Thus we find in Asia, Africa, 
America and Australia that the marriage laws of the lower races 
are connected with a belief in kinship or other relationship with 
animals. The evidence for this belief is thus entirely beyond sus- 
picion. We find, too, that political power, sway and social influence 
are^ based on the ideas of magic, of metamorphosis, and of the power 
which certain men possess to talk with the dead and to visit the 
abodes of death. All these ideas are the stuff of which myths are 
made, and the evidence of savage institutions, in every part of the 
world, proves that these ideas are the universal inheritance of 
savages. 

Savage men are like ourselves in curiosity and anxiety causas 
cognoscere return^ but with our curiosity they do not possess 
Savage ideas out powers of attention. They are as easily satisfied 
about the with an explanation of phenomena as they are eager 
World. £ p 0SSess an explanation. Inevitably they furnish 
themselves with their philosophy out of their scanty stock 
of acquired ideas, and these ideas and general conceptions 
seem almost imbecile to civilized men. Curiosity and 
credulity, then, are the characteristics of the savage intellect. 
When a phenomenon presents itself the savage requires an 
explanation, and that explanation he makes for himself, or 
receives from tradition, in the shape of a myth. The basis of 
these myths, which are just as much a part of early conjectural 
science as of early religion, is naturally the experience of the 
savage as construed by himself. Man's craving to know " the 
reason why " is already " among rude savages an intellectual 
appetite," and " even to the Australian scientific speculation 
has its germ in actual experience. ,,x How does he try to satisfy 
this craving? E. B. Tylor replies, "When the attention of 
a man in the myth-making stage of intellect is drawn to any 
phenomenon or custom which has to him no obvious reason, 
he invents and tells a story to account for it. " Against this 
statement it has been urged that men in the lower stages of 
culture are not curious, but take all phenomena for granted. If 
there were no direct evidence in favour of Tylor's opinion, it 
would be enough to point to the nature of savage myths them- 
selves. It is not arguing in a circle to point out that almost 
all of them are nothing more than explanations of intellectual 
difficulties, answers to the question, How came this or that 
phenomenon to be' what it is? Thus savage myths answer 
the questions — What was the origin of the world, and of men, 
and of beasts? How came the stars by their arrangement 

	1 E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, i. 369 (1871). 

and movements? How are the motions of sun and moon to 
be accounted for? Why has this tree a red flower, and this 
bird a black mark on the tail? What was the origin of the 
tribal dances, or of this or -that law of custom or etiquette? 
Savage mythology, which is also savage science, has a reply 
to all these and all similar questions, and that reply is always 
found in the shape of a story. The answers cannot be accounted 
for without the previous existence of the questions. 

We have now shown how savages come'to have a mythology. 
It is their way of satisfying the early form of scientific curiosity, 
their way of realizing the world in which they move. But they 
frame their stories, necessarily and naturally, in harmony with 
their general theory of things, with what we may call " savage 
metaphysics." Now early man, as Max Miiller says, " not only 
did not think as we think, but did not think as we suppose he 
ought to have thought.'' The chief distinction between his 
mode of conceiving the world and ours is his vast extension of 
the theory of personality. To the savage, and apparently to men 
more backward than the most backward peoples we know, all 
nature was a congeries of animated personalities. The savage's 
notion of personality is more a universally diffused feeling than 
a reasoned conception, and this feeling of a personal self he 
impartially distributes all over the world as known to him. 
One of the Jesuit missionaries in North America thus describes 
the Red Man's philosophy: 2 " Les sauvages se persuadent que 
non seulement les hommes et les autres animaux, mais aussi 
que toutes les autres choses sont anim6es." Crevaux, in the 
Andes, found that the Indians believed that the beasts have 
piays (sorcerers and doctors) like themselves. 5 This opinion 
we may name personalism, and it is the necessary condition 
of savage (and, as will be seen, of civilized) mythology. The 
Jesuits could not understand how spherical bodies like sun 
and moon could be mistaken for human beings. Their catechu- 
mens put them off with the answer that the drawn bows of the 
heavenly bodies gave them" their round appearance. " The 
wind was formerly a person; he became a bird," say the Bushmen, 
and gf do ka! kai y a respectable Bushman once saw the personal 
wind at Haarfontein. 4 The Egyptians; according to Herodotus 
(iii. 16), believed fire to be Sypiov ejjyfvxov, a live beast. The 
Bushman who saw the Wind meant to throw a stone at it, but 
it ran into a hill. From the wind as a person the Bhinyas in 
India (Dalton, p. 140) claim descent, and in Indian epic tradition 
the leader of the ape army was the son of the wind. The 
Wind, by certain mares, became the father of wind-swift steeds 
mentioned in the Iliad. The loves of Boreas are well known. 
These are examples of the animistic theory applied to what, in 
our minds, seems one of the least personal of natural phenomena. 
The sky (which appears to us even less personal) has been re- 
garded as a personal being by Samoyeds, Red Indians, Zulus, 5 
and traces of this belief survive in Chinese, Greek and Roman 
religion. 

We must remember, however, that to the savage, Sky, Sun, 
Sea, Wind, are not only persons, but they are savage persons. 
Their conduct is not what civilized men would attribute to 
characters so august; it is what uncivilized men think probable 
and befitting among beings like themselves. 

The savage regards all animals as endowed with personality. 
" lis tiennent les poissons raisonnables, comme aussi les cerfs," 
says a Jesuit father about the North-American ~ wvm 
Indians (Relations, loc. cit.). In Australia the Theory of 
natives believe that the wild dog has the power Man's Reia* 
of speech, like the cat of the Coverley witch in the JjJfJ^ 
Spectator. The Breton peasants, according to P. 
Sebillot, credit all birds with language, which they even attempt 
to interpret. The old English and the Arab superstitions 
about the language of beasts are examples of this opinion sur- 
viving among civilized races. The bear in Norway is regarded 
as almost a man, and his dead body is addressed and his wrath 
deprecated by Samoyeds and Red Indians. " The native bear 

	1 Relations (1636), p. 114. * Voyages, p. 159. 

	* South African Folk-Lore Journal (May 1880). 

	6 E. B. Tylor, op. cit. ii. 256. 

Kur-bo-roo is the .sage counsellor of the aborigines in all their 
difficulties. When bent on a dangerous expedition, the men 
will seek help from this clumsy creature, but in what way his 
opinions are made known is nowhere recorded." l H. R. School- 
craft mentions a Red Indian story explaining how " the bear 
does not die," but this tale Schoolcraft (like Herodotus in Egypt) 
" cannot bring himself to relate." He also gives examples of 
Iowas conversing with serpents. These may serve as examples 
of the savage belief in the human intelligence of animals. Man 
is on an even footing with them, and with them can interchange 
his ideas. But savages carry this opinion much further. Man 
in their view is actually, and in no figurative sense, akin to the 
beasts. Certain tribes in Java "believe that women when 
delivered of a child are frequently delivered at the same time 
of a young crocodile." 2 The common European story of a 
queen accused of giving birth to puppies shows the survival of 
the belief in the possibility of such births among civilized races, 
while the Aztecs had the idea that women who saw* the moon 
in certain circumstances would produce mice. But the chief 
evidence for the savage theory of man's close kinship with the 
lower animals is found in the institution called tolemism (q.v.) 
— the belief that certain stocks of men in the various tribes are 
descended by blood descent from, or are developed out of, or 
otherwise connected with, certain objects animate or inani- 
mate, but especially with beasts. The strength of the opinion is 
proved by its connexion with very stringent marriage laws. 
No man (according to the rigour of the custom) may marry a 
woman who bears the same kin name as himself, that is, who is 
descended from the same inanimate object or animal. Nor may 
people (if they can possibly avoid it) eat the flesh of animals who 
are their kindred. Savage man also believes that many of his 
own tribe-fellows have the power of assuming the shapes of 
animals, and that the souls of his dead kinsfolk revert to animal 
forms. 

E. W. Lane, in his introduction to the Arabian Nights (i. 58), 
says he found the belief in these transmigrations accepted seriously 
in Cairo. H. H. Bancroft brings evidence to prove that the Mexicans 
supposed^ pregnant women would turn into beasts, and sleeping 
children into mice, if things went wrong in the ritual of a certain 
solemn sacrifice. There is a well-known Scottish legend to the effect 
that a certain old witch was once fired at in her shape as a hare, 
and that where the hare was hit there the old woman was found to 
be wounded. J. F. Lafitau tells the same story as current among 
his Red Indian flock, except that the old witch and her son took the 
form of birds, not of hares. A Scandinavian witch does the same in 
the Egil saga. In Lafitau's tale the birds were wounded by the 
magic arrows of a medicine man, and the arrow-heads were found 
in the bodies of the human culprits. In Japan 3 people chiefly 
transform themselves into badgers. The sorcerers of Honduras 
(Bancroft, i. 740) " possessed the power of transforming men into 
wild beasts. " J. F. Regnard, the French dramatist, found in Lap- 
land (1681) that witches could turn men into cats, and could them- 
selves assume the forms of swans, crows, falcons and geese. Among 
the Bushmen* " sorcerers assume the form of beasts and jackals." 
M. Dobrizhofer, a missionary in Paraguay (1717-1791), learned that 
" sorcerers arrogate to themselves the power of changing men into 
tigers " (Eng. trans., i. 63). He was present at a conversion of this 
sort, a though the miracle beheld by the people was invisible to the 
missionary. Near Loanda Livingstone noted that " a chief may 
metamorphose himself into a lion, kill any one he chooses, and resume 
his proper form." The same accomplishments distinguish the Barotse 
ancf Balonda. 6 Among the Mayas of Central America sorcerers 
could transform themselves "into dogs, pigs and other animals; 
their glance was death to a victim (Bancroft, ii. 797). The 
Thlinkeets hold that their shamans have the same powers. 8 A 
bamboo in Sarawak is known to have been a man. Metamor- 
phoses into stones are as common among Red Indians and Australians 
as in Greek mythology. Compare the cases of Niobe and the victims 
of the Gorgon's head. 7 Zulus, Red Indians, Aztecs, 8 Andaman 
Islanders and other races believe that their dead assume the shapes 
of serpents and of other creatures, often reverting to the form of the 
animal from which they originally descended. In ancient Egypt 

	1 R. Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria, i. 446 (1878). 

	1 J. Hawkesworth, Voyages, iii. 756. 

	8 Lord Redesdale, Tales of Old Japan (1871). 

	4 Bleek, Brief Accounl of Bushman Folk-Lore, pp. 15, 40. 

	8 Missionary Travels, pp. 615, 642. 

	8 W. H. Dall, Alaska, p. 423 (1870). 

	7 Dorman, Origin of Primitive Superstitions, pp. 130, 134. 

	8 Sahagun, French trans., p* 226. 

	11 the usual prayers demand for the deceased the power of going and 
	coming from and to everywhere under any form they like." 9 A 
	trace of this opinion may be noticed in the Aeneid. The serpent 
	that appeared at the sacrifice of Aeneas was regarded as possibly 
	a " manifestation " of the soul of Anchises (Aeneid, v. 84) — 

	" Dixerat haec, adytis quum lubricus anguis ab imis 
	Septem ingens gyros, septena volumina, traxit," 
	and Aeneas is 

	11 Incertus, geniumne loci, famulumne parentis 
	Esse putet." 

On the death of Plotinus, as he gave up the ghost, a snake glided from 
under his bed into a hole in the wall. 10 Compare Pliny " on the cave 
" in quo manes Scipionis Africani majoris custodire draco dicitur." 
The last peculiarity in savage philosophy to which we need call 
attention here is the belief in spirits and in human intercourse 
with the shades of the dead. With the savage natural death 
is not a universal and inevitable ordinance. " All men must 
die" is a generah'zation which he has scarcely reached; in his 
philosophy the proposition is more like this — " all men who die 
die by violence." A natural death is explained as the result of 
a sorcerer's spiritual violence, and the disease is attributed to 
magic or to the action of hostile spirits. After death the man 
survives as a spirit, sometimes taking an animal form, sometimes 
invisible, sometimes to be observed " in his habit as he lived " 
(see Apparitions). The philosophy of the subject is shortly 
put in the speech of Achilles (Iliad, xxiii. 103) after he has beheld 
the dead Patroclus in a dream: " Ay me, there remaineth then 
even in the house of Hades a spirit and phantom of the dead, for 
all night long hath the ghost of hapless Patroclus stood over me, 
wailing and making moan." It is almost superfluous to quote 
here the voluminous evidence for the intercourse with spirits 
which savage chiefs and medicine men are believed to maintain. 
They can call up ghosts, or can go to the ghosts, in Australia, 
New Caledonia, New Zealand, North America, Zululand, among 
the Eskimo, and generally in every quarter of the globe. The 
men who enjoy this power are the same as they who can change 
themselves and others into animals. They too command the 
weather, and, says an old French missionary, " are regarded as 
very Jupiters, having in their hands the b'ghtning and the 
thunder " (Relations, loc. ciL). They make good or bad seasons, 
and control the vast animals who, among ancient Persians and 
Aryans of India, as among Zulus and Iroquois, are supposed to 
grant or withhold the rain, and to thunder with their enormous 
wings in the region of the clouds. 

Another fertile source of myth is magic, especially the magic 
designed to produce fertility, vegetable and animal. From the 
natives of northern and central Australia to the actors in the 
ritual of Adonis, or the folk among whom arose the customs of 
crowning the May king or the king of the May, all peoples have 
done magic to encourage the breeding of animals as part of the 
food supply, and to stimulate the growth of plants, wild or 
cultivated. In the opinion of J. G. Frazer, the human repre- 
sentatives or animal representatives, in the rites, of the spirit 
of vegetation; of the corn spirit; of the changing seasons, winter 
or summer, have been developed into many forms of gods, 
with appropriate myths, explanatory of the magic, and of the 
sacrifice of the chief performer. In the same way the adoration 
of b'ving human beings, the deification of living kings — whose 
title survives in our king or queen of the May, and in the rex 
nemorensis, the priest of Diana in the grove of Aricia — has been 
most fruitful in myths of divine beings. These human beings 
are often sacrificed, for various reasons, actual or hypothetical, 
and god? and heroes are almost as likely to be explained as 
spirits of vegetation now, as they were likely to become solar 
mythological figures in the system of Max Miiller. It is certainly 
true that divine beings in most mythologies are apt to acquire 
solar with other elemental attributes, including vegetable 
attributes. But that the origins of such mythical beings were, 
ab initio, either solar or vegetable, or, for that matter, animal, 
it would often be hard to prove. 

Frazer's ideas are to be found in a work of immense erudition, 
The Golden Bough (London, 1900). Two studies by him, pursuing 

	9 Records of the Past, x. 10. 

	10 Plotini vita, pp. 2, 95. 

	11 H. N. xv. 44,85. 

the same set of ideas in more detail, are Adonis, Attis, Osiris (1906) 
and Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship (1905). See A. 
Lang, Magic and Religion (London, 1901), for a criticism in detail 
of the general theory as set forth in The Golden Bough, Whatever 
may be said, Frazer has certainly made the most important of recent 
contributions to the study of mythology. # He has fixed the attention 
of students on a mass of early ideas, previously much neglected save 
by W. Mannhardt, and on the facts of ritual, which preserve these 
ideas and represent them in a kind of mystery plays. 

We are now in a position to sum up the ideas of savages about 
man's relations to the world. We started on this inquiry 
because we found that savages regarded sky, wind, sun, earth 
and so forth as practically men, and we had then to ask, what 
sort of men, men with what powers ? The result of our exam- 
ination, so far, is that in savage opinion sky, wind, sun, sea and 
many other phenomena have, being personal, all the powers 
attributed to real human persons. These powers and qualities 
are: (r) relationship to animals and ability to be transformed 
and to transform others into animals and other objects; (2) 
magical accomplishments, as — (a) power to visit or to procure 
the visits of the dead; (b) other magical powers, such as control 
over the weather and over the fertility of nature in all depart- 
ments. Once more, the great forces of nature, considered as 
persons, are involved in that inextricable confusion in which 
men, beasts, plants, stones, stars, are all on one level of person- 
ality and animated existence. This is the philosophy of savage 
life, and it is on these principles that the savage constructs his 
myths, while these, again, are all the scientific explanations of 
the universe with which he has been able to supply himself. 

Examples of Mythology. — Myths of the origin of the world 
and man are naturally most widely diffused. Man has every- 
where asked himself whence things came and how, and his 
myths are his earliest extant form of answer to this question. 
So confused and inconsistent are the mythical answers" that it 
is very difficult to classify them according to any system. If 
we try beginning with myths of creative gods, we find that the 
world is sometimes represented as pre-existent to the divine 
race. If we try beginning with myths of the origin of the world, 
we frequently find that it owes its origin to the activity of pre- 
existent supernatural beings. According to all modern views 
of creation, the creative mind is prior to the universe which it 
created. There is no such consistency of opinion in myths, 
whether of civilized or savage races. Perhaps the plan least open 
to objection is to begin with myths of the gods. But when we 
speak of gods, we must not give to the word a modern signifi- 
cance. As used here, gods merely mean non-natural and 
powerful beings, sometimes " magnified non-natural men," 
sometimes beasts, birds or insects, sometimes the larger forces 
and phenomena of the universe conceived of as endowed with 
human personality and passions. When Plutarch examined 
the Osirian myth (De Isid, xxv.) he saw that the " gods " in 
the tale were really " demons," " stronger than men, but 
having the divine part not wholly unalloyed " — "magnified non- 
natural men," in short. And such are the gods of mythology. 

In examining the myths of the gods we shall begin with the 
conceptions of the most backward tribes, and advance to the 
divine legends of the ancient civilized races. It will appear that, 
while the non-civilized gods are often theriomorphic, made in 
accordance with the ideas of non-civilized men, the civilized 
gods retain many characteristics of the savage gods, and these 
.characteristics are the " irrational element " in the divine myths. 

Myths of Gods: Savage Ideas. — It is not easy to separate the dis- 
cussion of savage myths of gods from the problem, Whence and how 
arose the savage belief in gods? The orthodox anthropological 
explanation has been that of E. B. Tylor, which closely resembles 
Herbert Spencer's " ghost theory." By reflection on dreams, in 
which the self, or " spirit," of the savage seems to wander free from 
the bounds of time and space, to see things remote, and to meet 
and recognize dead friends or foes ; by speculation on the experiences 
of trance and of phantasms of the dead or living, beheld with waking 
eyes; by pondering on the phenomena of shadows, of breath, of 
death and life, the savage evolved the idea of a separable soul or 
spirit capable of surviving bodily death. The spirit of the dead may 
tenant a material object, a " fetish," or may roam hungry and 
comfortless and need propitiation by food, for unpropitiated it is 
dangerous, or may be reincarnated, or may " go to its own herd " 
in another world. Again, it is naturally kind to its living kinsfolk, 
and so may be addressed in prayer. These are the doctrines of 
animism^ (q.v.), and, according to the usual anthropological theory, 
these spirits come to thrive to god's estate in favourable circum- 
stances, as where the dead man, when alive, had great mana or wakan, 
a great share of the ether, so to speak, which, in savage metaphysics, 
is the viewless vehicle of magical influences. Thus the ghost of the 
hero or medicine man .of a kin or tribe may be raised to divine rank, 
while again — the doctrine of spirits once developed, and spirits once 
allotted to the great elemental forces and phenomena of nature, sky, 
thunder, the sea, the forests — we have the beginnings of depart- 
mental deities, such as Agni, gpd of fire; Poseidon, god of the sea; 
Zeus, god of the sky — though in recent theories Zeus appears to be 
regarded as primarily the god of the oak tree, a spirit of vegetation. 

On this^ theory animism, s the doctrine of spirits, is the source of 
all belief in gods. But it is found that among the lowest or least 
cultured races, such as the south-eastern tribes of Australia, who 
do not propitiate ancestral spirits by offerings of food, or address 
them in prayer, there often exists a belief in an " All-Father," to 
use Howitt's convenient expression. This being cannot have been 
evolved out of the cult of ancestors, where ancestors are not wor- 
shipped; and he is not even regarded as a spirit, but, in Matthew 
Arnold's phrase, as " a magnified non-natural man." He existed 
before death came into the world, and he still exists. His home is in 
or above the sky, but there was a time when he walked the earth, a 
potent magic-worker; endowed mankind with such arts and institu- 
tions as they possess ;^ and left to them certain rules of life, ethics 
and ritual. Often he is regarded as the maker of things, or of most 
things, and of mankind; or mankind are his children, descended 
from disobedient sons of his, whom he cast out of heaven. Very 
frequently he is the judge of souls, and sends the good and bad to 
their own places of reward and punishment. He is usually^ supposed 
to watch over human conduct, but this is by no means invariably 
the case. Sometimes he, like the Atnatu of the Kaitish tribe of 
central Australia, is only vigilant in matters of ritual, such as cir- 
cumcision, subincision and the use of the sacred bull-roarer, the 
Greek £6ju£os. As an almost universal rule, in the lowest culture, 
no prayers are addressed to this being; he has no sacrifices, no dwell- 
ing made with hands; and the images of him, in clay, that are made 
and danced round with invocations of his name at the tribal cere- 
monies of initiation, are destroyed at the close of the performances. 
If the name of " gqd " is denied to such beings because they receive 
little cult, it may still be admitted that the belief might easily develop 
into a form of theism, independent of and underived from animism, 
or the ghost theory. 

The best account of this All-Father belief in the lowest culture is 
to be read in R. Howitt's Native Races of South-East Australia. Under 
the names of Baiamc, Pundjel, Mulkari, Daramulun 
and many others, the south-eastern tribes (both those Australian 
who reckon descent in the female and those who reckon Savages* 
by the male line) have this faith in an All-Father, the 
attributes varying in various communities. The most highly 
developed All-Father is the Baiame or Byamee of the Euahlayi 
tribe of north-western New South Wales, to whom prayers for the 
welfare of the souls of the dead are, or recently were, addressed — the 
tribe dwelling a hundred miles away from the nearest missionary 
station (Protestant). 1 

In the centre of Australia, Atnatu, self-created, is known, as has 
been said, to the Kaitish tribe, next neighbours of the Arunta of the 
Macdonnell Hills. Among the Arunta, Mr Strehlow (Globus, May 
1907) finds such a being as Atnatu, and also among some other 
adjacent tribes, as the Luritja. See, too, Strehlow and von Leon- 
hardi, in Veroffentlichungen aus dem stddtischen Vdlker- Museum 
(Frankfurt-am-Main, 1907, vol. i.). But Messrs B. Spencer and 
F. J. Gillen, who discovered Atnatu, did not find any trace of an 
All-Father among the Arunta, or any other of the tribes to the north 
and north-east of the centre. Mr Strehlow's branch of the Arunta 
they did not examine. 

It is plain that the All-Father belief , in favourable circumstances, 
especially if ghost worship remained undeveloped, might be evolved 
into theism. But all over the savage world, especially in Africa, 
spirit worship has sprung up and choked the All-Father, who, how- 
ever, in most savage regions, abides as a name, receiving no sacrifice, 
and, save amon^ the Masai, a seldom being addressed in prayer. 
A list of such otiose great beings in the background of religion is 
given in Lang's The Making of Religion (1808). Since the publica- 
tion of that book much additional evidence has accrued from Africa 
and Melanesia, where the belief occurs in a few islands, but, in the 
majority, is absent or unrecorded. Most of the fresh evidence is 
given in La Notion de VUre supreme chez les peuples non*civilises, 
by Rene" Hoffmann (Geneva, 1907). See also the Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute (1899-1907), vols, xxix., xxxii., xxxiv., 
xxxv., and the works of Miss Mary Kingsley, and Spieth, Die Ewe- 
Stamme. Reimer (Berlin, 1906), and Sundermann in Warneck's 
Allgemeine Missionszeilschrift, vol. xi. An excellent statement is that 
of Pere Schmidt, S.V.D., in Anthropos. Bd. III., Hft. 3 (1908), pp. 
559-611. Tylor's efforts to show that these All-Fathers were 
derived from missionary or other European influences (Nineteenth 

	1 See Mrs Langloh Parker's The Euahlayi Tribe* 

Century, 1892) have not been successful (see Lang, Magic and Religion, 
" The Theory of Loan Gods ")and N.W.Thomas in Man (1905)^,49 
et seq. The All-Father belief is most potent among * the lowest 
races, and always tends to become obsolete under the competition 
of serviceable ancestral spirits, or gods made in the image of such 
spirits, who can be bribed by sacrifices or induced by prayers to help 
man in his various needs. 

The belief in the All-Father in south-eastern Australia is concealed 
from the women and children who, at most, know his exoteric 
name, often meaning " Our Father," and is revealed only to the 
initiate, among whom are a very few white men, like Howitt. Mrs 
Langloh Parker, of course, was not initiated (indeed, no white man 
has gone through the actual and very painful rites), but confidences 
were made to her with great secrecy. The All-Father, even at his 
best, among the Kurnai, Kamilaroi and Euahlayi, is the centre of 
many grotesque and sportive myths. He usually has a wifeand 
children, not in all cases born, but rather they are emanations. 
One of these children is often his mediator with men, and has the 
charge of the rites and the mystic bull-roarer. The relation is that 
of Apollo to Zeus in Greek myth. 

Many of the wilder myths are the expressions of the sportive and 
humorous faculties. Some arise naturally thus: Baiame, say, 
originated everything, therefore he originated the grotesque 
mummeries and dances of the mysteries. To explain these, myths 
have been developed to show that they arose in some grotesque 
incident of Baiame's personal existence on earth. Many Greek 
myths, most derogatory to the dignity of Demeter, Dionysus^ Zeus 
or Hera, arose in the same way, as explanations of buffooneries in 
the Eleusinian or other mysteries. In medieval literature the most 
sacred persons of our religion have grotesque associations attached 
to them in the same manner. 

While the All-Father belief is common in the tribes of south- 
eastern Australia, the tribes round Lake Eyre, the Arunta (as 
known to Messrs Spencer and Gillen), and the other central and 
northern tribes, are credited with no germs of belief in what is called 
a supreme, and may truly be styled a superior being. That being, 
in many cases, but not so commonly in Australia, has a malevolent 
opposite who thwarts his work, an Ahriman to his Ormuzd. In 
one district, where the superior being is a. crow, his opposite is an 
eagle-hawk. These two birds in many tribes give names to the two 
great exogamousand intermarrying divisions; in their case there is a 
va et vient of divine, human and theriomorphic elements, just as in 
the Greek myths of Zeus. As a rule, however, the Australian All- 
Father is anthropomorphic^ and fairly well described in the native 
term when they speak English as " the Big Man," powerful, death- 
Jess, friendly, * able to go everywhere and do everything," " to see 
whatever you do." The existence of the belief in this being was 
accepted by T. Waitz^ and, though disputed by many squatters and 
most anthropologists, is now admitted on the strength of the evidence 
of Howitt, Cameron, Mrs Langloh Parker, Dawson, W. E. Roth in 
Ethnological Studies, and many other close observers. The belief 
being esoteric, a secret of the initiated, necessarily escaped casual 
inquirers. 

Meanwhile, among some of the Arunta of the centre, among the 
Dieri and Urabunna tribes near Lake Eyre and their congeners, 
and among the tribes north by east of the Arunta, no such belief 
has been discovered by Messrs Spencer and Gillen, from whom the 
tribes kept no secrets, or by Mr Siebert, a missionary among the now 
aH but extinct Dieri. ^ There is just a trace of a dim sky-dwelling 
being, Arawotja, possibly an all but obliterated survival of an All- 
Father. Howitt speaks too of the Dieri Kutchi, who inspires 
medicine-men with ideas, but about him our information is scanty. 
Among all these tribes religion now takes another line, the belief 
in a supernormal race of Titanic beings, with no superior, who were 
the first dwellers on earth ; who possessed powers far exceeding those 
of the medicine-men of to-day; and who, in one way or another, 
were connected with, or developed from, the totem animals.vege- 
tables and other objects. These beings modified the face of the 
country; in Arunta belief rocks and trees arose to mark the places 
where they finally " went into the ground " (Oknanikilla), and their 
spirits still haunt certain places such as these; and are reincarnated 
in native women who pass by. These beings, in Arunta called 
" the people of the Alcheringa, or dream time " (but cf. Strehlow 
in Globus, ut supra), originated the tribal rites of initiation. In 
Dieri they are called Mura-Mura, and to them prayers are made for 
rain, accompanied by rain-making magic ceremonies, which in this 
case may be a symbolical expression of the prayers. There is a 
large body of myths about the Alcheringa folk, or Mura-Mura 
(see Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes of Central Australia, Native 
Tribes of Northern Australia, and Howitt, Native Tribes of South- 
Eastern Australia), and the myths of their wanderings, prodigies 
and institution of rites and magic are represented in the dances of 
the mysteries. Most of the magic is worked (Intichiuma in Arunta) 
by the members of each totem kin or group for the behoof of the 
totem as an article of food supply. These rites are common in 
North America, but are worked, by members of gilds or societies, 
not by totern kins. 
- The belief in these Mura-Mura or Alcheringa folk may obviously 
develop, in favourable circumstances, into a polytheism like that of 
Greece, or of Egypt, or of the Maoris. The old Irish gods in the 
poetic romances appear to have the same origin and shade away 
into the fairies. The baser Greek myths of the wanderings, 
amours and adventures of the gods, myths ignored by Homer, are 
parallel to t£e adventures of the Alcheringa people, and the fable of 
the mutilation of Osiris and the search for the lost organ by I sis, 
actually occurs among the Alcheringa tales of Messrs Spencer and 
Gillen. Among the Arunta, the Alcheringa folk are part of a 
strangely elaborate theory of evolution and of animism, which leaves 
no room for a creative being, or for a future life of the spirit, which 
is merely reincarnated at intervals. 

Thus the doctrines of evolution and of creation, or the making of 
things, stand apart, or blend, in the metaphysics and religion of the 
lowest and least progressive of known peoples. The question as to 
which theory came first, whether Alcheringaism is a scientific 
effort that swept away All-Fatherism, or whether All-Fa therism is 
a religious reaction in despair of science and of the evolutionary 
doctrine, is settled by each inquirer in accordance with his personal 
bias. It has been argued that All-Fatherism is an advance, con- 
ditioned by coastal influences — more rain and more food — con- 
comitant with a social advance to individual marriage, and reckon- 
ing of kin in the male line. But tribes far from the sea, as in northern 
New South Wales and Queensland, have the All-Father belief, with 
individual marriage and; female descent, while tribes of the north 
coast, with male descent, are credited with no All-Father; and the 
Arunta, as far as possible from the sea, have no All-Father (save in 
Strehlow's district) , and have individual marriage and male reckon- 
ing of descent in matters of inheritance; while the Urabunna and 
Dieri, with female descent and the custom of pirrauru (called 4 * group 
marriage " by Howitt), are not credited with the All-Father belief. 
Thus coastal conditions have clearly no causal influence on the 
development of the All-Father belief'. If they had, the natives of 
central Queensland, remote from the sea, should not have their 
All-Father (Mulkari), and the natives of the northern and north- 
eastern coasts should have an All-Father, who is still to seek. The 
Arunta of Messrs Spencer and Gillen may have possessed and deposed 
the Altjira superior being of the Arunta known to Mr Strehlow, 
like the Atnatu of the adjacent Kaitish, or the All-Father of the 
neighbouring Luritja; or these beings may be more recent diver- 
gences of doctrine, departures from pure Alcheringaism with no All- 
Father. At present, at least, it is premature to dogmatize on these 
problems. 1 

The chief being among the supernatural characters of Bushman 
mythology is the^ insect called the Mantis.* Cagn or Ikaggen, the 
Mantis, is sometimes regarded with religious respect as 
a benevolent god. But his adventures are the merest **"&*** 
nightmares of puerile fancy. He has a wife, an adopted *> aY *& s * 
daughter, whose real father is the " swallower " in Bushman swallow- 
ing myths, and the daughter has a son, who is the Ichneumon. 
The Mantis made an eland out of the shoe of his son-in-law. The 
moon was also created by the Mantis out of his shoe, and it is red, 
because the shoe was covered with the red dust of Bushman-land. 
The Mantis is defeated in an encounter with a cat which happened 
to be singing a song about a lynx. The Mantis (like Poseidon, 
Hades, Metis and other Greek gods)was once swallowed, but dis- 
gorged alive. The swallower was the monster I lkhwai-hemm. 
Like Heracles when he leaped into the belly of the monster which 
was about to swallow Hesione, the Mantis once jumped down the 
throat of a hostile elephant, and so destroyed him. The heavenly 
bodies are gods among the Bushmen, but their nature and adventures 
must be discussed among other myths of sun, moon and stars. As 
a creator Cagn is sometimes said to have " given orders, and caused 
all things to appear to be made." He struck snakes with his staff 
and turned them into men, as Zeus did with the ants in Aegina. 
But the Bushmen's mythical theory of the origin of things must, 
as far as possible, be kept apart from the fables of the Mantis, the 
Ichneumon and other divine beings. Though animals, these gods 
have human passions and character, and possess the usual magical 
powers attributed to sorcerers. 

Concerning the mythology of the Hottentots and Namas, we have 
a great deal of information in a book named Tsuni-Goam, the Supreme 
Being of the Khoi-Khoi (i88i),by DrT. Hahn. This author collected 
the old notices of Hottentot myths, and added material from his 
own researches. The chief god of the Hottentots is a being named 
Tsuni-Goam, who is universally regarded by his worshippers as a 
deceased sorcerer. According to one old believer, " Tsui-Goab " 
(an alternative reading of the god's name) *' was a great powerful 
chief of the Khoi-Khoi— in fact, he was the first Khoi-Khoib from 
whom all the Khoi-Khoi tribes took their name." He is always 

	1 The drawback to knowledge is the rarity of full acquaintance 
	with native languages. Strehlow, Roth and Ridley seem best 
	equipped on the linguistic side. Spencer and Gillen do not tell us 
	that they have a colloquial knowledge of any Australian language. 
	Gason, author of a work on the Dieri tribe, knew their language 
	well, but several of his statements appear to be inaccurate. Mrs 
	Langloh Parker describes her methods of checking and controlling 
	native statements made in English. 

	* Accounts of the Mantis and of his performances will be found 
	in the Cape Monthly MagazineQuly 1874), and in Dr Bleek's Brief 
	Account of Bushman Folk-Lore. 

represented as at war (in the usual crude dualism of savages) with 
" another chief " named Gaunab. The prayers addressed to Tsui- 
Goab are simple and natural in character, the " private ejaculations " 
of men in moments of need or distress. As usual, religion is more 
advanced than mythology. It appears that, by some accounts, 
Tsui-Goab lives in the red sky and Gaunab in the dark sky. The 
neighbouring race of Namas have another old chief for god, a being 
called Heitsi Eibib. His graves are shown in many places, like those 
of Osiris, which, says Plutarch, abounded in Egypt. He is propi- 
tiated by passers-by at his sepulchres. He has intimate relations 
in peace and war with a variety of animals whose habits are some- 
times explained (like those of the serpent in Genesis) as the result 
of the curse of Heitsi Eibib. Heitsi Eibib was born in a mysterious 
way from a cow, as Indra in the Black Yajvr- Veda entered into and 
was born from the womb of a being who also bore a cow. The 
Rig-Veda (iv. 18, 1) remarks, " His mother, a cow, bore Indra, an 
unlicked calf " — probably a metaphorical way of speaking. Heitsi 
Eibib, like countless other gods and heroes, is also said to have been 
the son of a virgin who tasted a particular plant, and so became 
pregnant, as in the German and Gallophrygian marchen of the 
almond tree, given by Grimm and Pausanias. Incest is one of the 
feats of Heitsi Eibib. Tsui-Goab, in the opinion of his worshippers, 
as we have seen, is a deified dead sorcerer, whose name means 
Wounded Knee, the sorcerer having been injured in the knee by an 
enemy. Dr Hahn tries to prove (by philology's " artful aid ") 
that the name really means " red dawn," and is a Hottentot way of 
speaking of the infinite. The philological arguments advanced 
are extremely weak, and by no means convincing. If we grant, 
however, for the sake of argument, that the early Hottentots wor- 
shipped the infinite under the figure of the dawn, and that, by for- 
getting their own meaning, they came to believe that the words 
which really meant " red dawn" meant " wounded knee " we must 
still admit that the devout have assigned to their deity all the attri- 
butes of an ancestral sorcerer. In short, " their Red Dawn," if 
red dawn he be, is a person, and a savage person, adored exactly as 
the actual fathers and grandfathers of the Hottentots are adored. 
We must explain this legend, then, on these principles, and not as an 
allegory of the dawn as the dawn appears to civilized people. About 
Gaunab (the Ahriman to Tsui-Goab's Ormuzd) Dr Hahn gives two 
distinct opinions. " Gaunab was at first a ghost, a mischief-maker 
and evil-doer " (op. cit. p. 85). But Gaunab he declares to be 
" the night-sky " (p. 126). Whether we regard Gaunab, t Heitsi 
Eibib and Tsui-Goab as originally mythological representations of 
natural phenomena, or as deified dead men, it is plain' that they are 
now venerated as non-natural human beings, possessing the custom- 
ary attributes of sorcerers. Thus of Tsui-Goab it is said, " He could 
do wonderful things which no other man could do, because he was 
very wise. He could tell what would happen in future times. 
He died several times, and several times he rose again n (statement 
of old Kxarab in Hahn, p. 61). 

The mythology of the Zulus as reported by H.Callaway (Unkulun- 
kulu, 1 868-1 870) is very thin and uninteresting. The Zulus are 
great worshippers of ancestors^ (who appear to men in the form of 
snakes), and they regard a being called Unkulunkulu as their first 
ancestor, and sometimes as the creator, or at least as the maker of 
men. It does not appear they identify Unkulunkulu, as a rule, 
with " the lord of heaven," who, like Indra, causes the thunder. 
The word answering to our lord is also applied," even to beasts, 
as the lion and the boa." The Zulus, like many distant races, 
sometimes attribute thunder to the " thunder-bird/' which, as in 
North America, is occasionally seen and even killed by men. " It 
is said to have a red bill, red legs and a short red tail like fire. The 
bird is boiled for the sake of the fat, which is used by the heaven- 
doctors to puff on their bodies, and to anoint their lightning-rods." 
The Zulus are so absorbed in propitiating the shades of their dead 
(who, though in serpentine bodies, have human dispositions) that 
they appear to take little pleasure in mythological narratives. At 
the same time, the Zulus have many " nursery tales," the plots and 
incidents of which often bear the closest resemblance to the heroic 
myths of Greece, and to the marchen of European peoples. 1 These 
indications will give a general idea of African divine myths. On 
the west coast the " ananzi " or spider takes the place of the mantis 
insect among the Bushmen. For some of his exploits Dasent's Tales 
from the Norse (2nd ed., Appendix) may be^ consulted. For South 
African' religion see Lang. Magic and Religion; Dennett, At the 
« Back of the Black Man's Mind; Junod, Les Barotsa; Spieth, Die 
Ewe-Stomme; Frazer, The Golden Bough. 

Turning from the natives of Australia, and from African races 
of various degrees of culture, to the Papuan inhabitants of Melanesia, 
Melanesia^ we ** nc * tnat mythological ideas are scarcely on a higher 
Savaees Ievel * An exce " ent account of the myths of the Banks 
** * Islanders and Solomon Islanders was given in Journ. 
AnthropoL Inst. (Feb. 1881) by the Rev. R. H. Codrington. The 
article contains a critical description of the difficulty with which mis- 
sionaries obtain information about the prior creeds. The people of the 

	1 These are collected by Callaway, Zulu Nursery Tales (1868). 
	Similar Kafir stories, also closely resembling the popular fictions of 
	European races, have been published by Thcal. Many other examples 
	are published in the South African Folk-Lore Journal (1879, 1880). 

Banks Islands are chiefly ancestor-worshippers, but they also believe 
in, and occasionally pray to, a being named I Qat, one of the prehuman 
race endowed with supernatural powers who here, as elsewhere, do 
duty as gods. Here is an example of a prayer to Qat — the devotee 
is supposed to be in danger with his canoe: " Qate! Marawa! look 
down on me, smooth the sea for us two that 1 may go safely on the sea. 
Beat down for me the crests of the tide-rip; let the tide-rip settle 
down away from me, beat it down level that it may sink and roll 
away, and I may come to a quiet landing-place." Compare the 
prayer of Odysseus to the river, whose mouth he had reached after 
three days' swimming on the tempestuous sea. *' ' Hear me, 
O king, whosoever thou art, unto thee I am come as to one to whom 
prayer is made . . . nay, pity me, O king, for I avow myself thy 
suppliant.' So spake he, and the god stayed his stream, and with- 
held his waves, and made the water smooth before him " (Odyssey 
v. 450). The prayer of the Melanesian is on rather a higher religious 
level than that of the Homeric hero. The myths of Qat's adventures, 
however, are very crude, though not so wild as some of the Scan- 
dinavian myths about Odin and Loki, while they are less immoral 
than the adventures of Indra and Zeus. Qat was born in the isle 
of Vanua Levu; his mother was either a stone at the time of his 
birth, or was turned into a stone afterwards, like Niobe. The mother 
of Apollo, according to Aelian, had the misfortune to be changed 
into a wolf. Qat had eleven brothers, not much more reputable 
than the Osbaldistones in Rob Roy. The youngest brother was 
" Tangaro Loloqong, the Fool." His pastime was to make wrong 
all that Qat made right, and he is sometimes the Ahriman to Qat's 
Ormuzd. The creative achievements of Qat must be treated of in 
the next section. Here it may be mentioned that, like the hero 
in the Breton marchen, Qat " brought the dawn " by introducing 
birds whose notes proclaimed the coming of morning. Before 
Qat's time there had been no night, but he purchased a sufficient 
allowance of darkness from I Qong, that is, night considered as a 
person in accordance with the law of savage thought already ex- 
plained. Night is a person in Greek mythology, and in the four- 
teenth book of the Iliad we read that Zeus abstained from punishing 
Sleep 4< because he feared to offend swift Night." Qat produced 
dawn, for the first time, by cutting the darkness with a knife of red 
obsidian. Afterwards " the fowls and birds showed the morning." 
On one occasion an evil power (Vui) slew all Qat's brothers, and 
hid them in a food-chest. As in the common " swallowing-myths " 
which we have met among bushmen and Australians, and will find 
among the Greeks, Qat restored his brethren to life. Qat is always 
accompanied by a powerful supernatural spider named Marawa. 
He first made Marawa's acquaintance when he was cutting down 
a tree for a canoe. Every night (as in the common European story, 
about bridge-building and church-building) the work was all undone 
by Marawa, whom Qat found means to conciliate. In all his future 
adventures the spider was as serviceable as the cat in Puss in Boots 
or the other grateful animals in European legend. Qat's great 
enemy, Qasavara, was dashed against the hard sky, and was turned 
into stone, like the foes of Perseus. The stone is still shown in Vanua 
Levu, like the stone which was Zeus in Laconia. Qat, like so many 
other " culture-heroes," disappeared mysteriously, and white men 
arriving in the island have been mistaken for Qat. His departure ■ 
is sometimes connected with the myth of the deluge. In the New 
Hebrides, Tagar takes the r61e of Qat, and Suqe of the bad principle, 
Loki, Ahriman, Tangaro Loloqong, the Australian Crow and so 
forth. These are the best known divine myths of the Melanesians. 
For their All-Fathers see Holmes, /. A. I., vol. xxxv., and O'Farrell, 
J. A. I. r vol. xxxiv., with Sundermann in Warneck's Allgcmeine 
Missionszeitschrift, vol. xi. 1884. 

It is " a far cry " from Vanua Levu to Vancouver Island, and, 
ethnologically, the Ahts of the latter region are extremely remote 
from the Papuans with their mixture of Malay and American 
Polynesian blood. The Ahts, however, differ but little savages. 
in their mythological beliefs from the races of the Banks 
Islands or of the New Hebrides. In Sproat's Scenes from Savage 
Life (1868) there is a good account ofAht opinions by a settler who 
had won the confidence of the natives between i860 and 1868. 
11 There is no end to the stories which an old Indian will relate," says 
Mr Sproat, when " one quite possesses his confidence." "The first 
Indian who ever lived " is a divine being, something of a creator, 
something of a first father, like Unkulunkulu among the Zulus. 
His name is Quawteaht. He married a pre-existent bird, the thunder- 
bird Tootah (we have met him among the Zulus), and by the 
bird he became the father of Indians. Wispohahp is the Aht 
Noah, who, with his wife, his two brothers and their wives escaped 
from the deluge in a canoe. Quawteaht is inferior as a deity to the 
Sun and Moon. He is the Yama of an Aht paradise, or home of the 
dead, where " everything is beautiful and abundant." From all 
that is told of Quawteaht he seems to be an ideal and powerful Aht, 
imaginatively placed at the beginning of things, and quite capable 
of intermarriage with a bird. His creative exploits must be con- 
sidered later. Quawteaht is the Aht Prometheus Purphoros, or 
fire-stealer. 

Passing down the American continent from the north-west, we 
find Yehf the chief hero-god and mythical personage among the 
Tlingits. Like many other heroes or gods, Yehl had a miraculous 
birth. His mother, a Tlingit woman, whose sons had all been 
slain, met a friendly dolphin, which advised her to swallow a pebble 
and a little sea-water. The birth of Yehl was the result. In his 
youth he shot a supernatural crane, and can always fly about in its 
feathers, like Odin and Loki in Scandinavian myth, He is usually, 
however, regarded as a raven, and holds the same relation to men 
and the world as the eagle-hawk Pund-jel does in Australia. His 
great opponent (for the eternal dualism comes in) is Khanukh, who 
is a wolf, and the ancestor or totem of the wolf-race of men as Yehl 
is of the raven. The opposition between the Crow and Eagle-hawk 
in Australia will be remembered. Both animals or men or gods 
take part in creation. Yehl is the Prometheus Purphoros of the 
Tlingxts, but myths of the fire-stealer would form matter for a 
separate section. Yehl also stole water, in his bird-shape, exactly 
as Odin stole " Suttung's mead " when in the shape of an eagle. 1 
Yehl's powers of metamorphosis and of flying into the air are the 
common accomplishments of sorcerers, and he is a rather crude form 
of first father, culture-hero " and creator. 1 

Among the Karok Indians we find the great hero and divine 
benefactor in the shape of, not a raven, nor an eagle-hawk, nor a 
mantis insect, nor a spider, but a coyote. Among both Karok 
and Navaho the coyote is the Prometheus Purphoros, or, as the 
Aryans of India calf him, Matarisvan the fire-stealer. Among the 
Papagos, on the eastern side of the Gulf of California, the coyote or 
prairie wolf is the creative hero and chief supernatural being. In 
Oregon the coyote fs also the " demiurge," but most of the myths 
about him refer to his creative exploits, and will be more appro- 
priately treated in the next section. 

Moving up the Pacific coast to British Columbia, we find the 
musk-rat taking the part played by Vishnu, when in his avatar as a 
boar he fished up the earth from the waters. Among the Tinneh a 
miraculous dog, who, like an enchanted fairy prince, could assume 
the form of a handsome young man, is the chief divine being of the 
myths. He too is chiefly a creative or demiurgic being, answering 
to Purusha in the Rig Veda, So far the peculiar mark of the wilder 
American tribe legends is the bestial character of the divine beings, 
which is also illustrated in Australia and Africa, while the bestial 
clothing, feathers or fur, drops but slowly off Indra, Zeus and the 
Egyptian Ammon, and the Scandinavian Odin. All these are more 
or less anthropomorphic, but retain, as will be seen, numerous relics 
of a theriomorphic condition. 

See C. Hill-Tout and F. Boas in various publications, and, generally, 
the volumes of the Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 
U.S.A. For Ti-ra-wa, " the Ruler of the Universe," also styled 
A-ti-us, " father," among the Pawnees, see G. B. Grinnell, Pawnee 
Hero Stories (1893). 

Maori and^ Polynesian Beliefs. — Passing from the lower savage 
myths, of which space does not permit us to offer a larger selection, 
we turn to races in the upper strata of barbarism. Among these 
the Maoris of New Zealand, and the Polynesian people generally, 
are remarkable for a mythology largely intermixed with early 
attempts at more philosophical speculation. The Maoris and 
Mangaians, and other peoples, have had speculators among them 
not very far removed from the mental condition of the earliest Greek 
philosophers, Empedocles, Anaximander, and the rest. In fact the 
process from the view of nature which we call personalism to the 
crudest theories of the physicists was apparently begun in New 
Zealand before the arrival of Europeans. In Maori mythology it 
is more than usually difficult to keep apart the origin of the world 
and the origin and nature of the gods. Long traditional hymns give 
an account of the " becoming out of nothing " which resulted in 
the evolution of the gods and the world. In the beginning (as in the 
Greek myths of Uranus and Gaea), Heaven (Rangi, conceived of as 
a person) was indissolubly united to his wife Earth (Papa), and be- 
tween them they begat gods which necessarily dwelt in darkness. 
These^ gods were some in vegetable, some in animal form ; some 
traditions place among these gods Tiki the demiurge, who (like 
Prometheus^ made men out of clay. The offspring of Rangi and 
Papa (kept in the dark as they were) held a council to determine 
how they should treat their parents, " Shall we slay them, or shall 
we separate them?" In the # Hesiodic fable, Cronus separates 
the heavenly pair by mutilating his oppressive father Uranus. 
Among the Maoris the god Tutenganahan cut the sinews which 
united Earth and Heaven, and Tane Mahuta wrenched them apart, 
and kept them eternally asunder. The new dynasty now had 
earth to themselves, but Tawhiramatea, the wind, abode aloft with 
his father. Some of the gods were in the forms of lizards and fishes ; 
some went to the land, some to the water. As among the gods 
and Asuras of the Vedas, there were many wars in the divine race, 
and as the incantations of the Indian Brahmanas are derived from 
those old experiences of the Vedic gods, so are the incantations of 
the Maoris. The gods of New Zealand, the greater gods at least, 
may be called " departmental "; each person who is an elementary 
force is also the god of that force. As Te Heu, a powerful chief, 
said, there is division of labour among men, and so there is among 
gods. " One made this, another that; Tane made trees, Ru moun- 
tains, Tanga-roa fish, and so forth." * The " departmental " 
arrangement prevails among the polytheism of civilized peoples, 

	1 Dasent, Bran's Telling: Younger Edda, p. 94. 

	1 Bancroft, vol. iv. * Taylor, New Zealand, p. 108 

and is familiar to all from the Greek examples. Leaving the high 
gods whose functions are so large, while their forms (as of lizard, 
fish and tree) are often so mean, we come to Maui, the great divine 
hero of the supernatural race in Polynesia. Maui in some respects 
answers to the chief of the Adityas in Vedic mythology ; in others he 
answers to Qat, Quawteaht, and other savage divine personages. 
Like the son of the Vedic Aditi, 4 Maui is a rejected and abortive 
child of his mother, but afterwards attains to the highest reputation. 
As Qat brought the hitherto unknown night, so Maui settled the sun 
and moon in their proper courses. He induced the sun to move 
orderly by giving him a violent beating. A similar feat was per- 
formed by the Sun-trapper, a famous Red Indian chief. These 
tales belong properly to the department of solar myths. Maui him- 
self is thought by E. B. Tylor to be a myth of the sun, but the sun 
could hardly give the sun a drubbing. Maui slew monsters, invented 
barbs for fish-hooks, frequently adopted the form of various birds, 
acted as Prometheus Purphoros the fire-stealer, drew a whole island 
up from the bottom of the deep ; he was a great sorcerer and magician. 
Had Maui succeeded in his attempt to pass through the body of 
Night (considered as a woman) men would have been immortal. 
But a little bird which sings at sunset wakened Night, she snapped up 
Maui, and men die. This has been called a myth of sunset, but the 
sun does what Maui failed to do, he passes through the body of Night 
unharmed. The adventure is one of the myths of the origin of 
death, which are almost universally diffused. Maui, though regarded 
as a god, is not often addressed in prayer. 5 

The whole system, as far as it can be called a system, of Maori 
mythology is obviously based on the savage conceptions of the 
world which have already been explained. The Polynesian system 
differs mainly in detail; we have the separation of heaven and earth, 
the animal-shaped gods, the fire-stealing, the exploits of Maui, and 
scores of^ minor myths in \V. W. Gill's Myths and Songs of the South 
Pacific, in the researches of W. Ellis, of Williams, in G. Turner's 
Polynesia, and in many other accessible works. 

Mexican and Perwnan Beliefs. — The Maoris and other Polynesian 
peoples are perhaps the best examples of a race which has risen far 
above the savagery of Bushmen and Australians, but has not yet 
arrived at the stage in which great centralized monarchies appear. 
The Mexican and Peruvian civilizations were far ahead of Maori 
culture, in so far as they possessed the elements of a much more 
settled and highly-organized society- Their religion had its fine 
lucid intervals, but their mythology and ritual were little better 
than savage ideas, elaborately worked up by the imagination of a 
cruel and superstitious priesthood. In cruelty the Aztecs surpassed 
perhaps all peoples of the Old World, except certain Semitic stocks, 
and their gods, of course, surpassed almost all other gods in blood- 
thirstiness. But in grotesque and savage points of faith the ancient 
Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Vedic Indians ran even the Aztecs 
pretty close. 

Bernal Diaz, the old " conquistador," has described the hideous 
aspect of the idols which Cortes destroyed, " idols in the shape of 
hideous dragons as big as calves," idols half in the form of men, 
half of dogs, and serpents which were worshipped as divine. The 
old contemporary missionary Sahagun has left one of the earliest 
detailed accounts of the natures and myths of these gods, but, though 
Sahagun took great pains in collecting facts, his speculations must 
be accepted with caution. He was convinced (like Caxton in his 
Destruction of Troy, and like St Augustine) that the heathen gods 
were only dead men worshipped. Ancestor-worship is a great force 
in early religion, and the qualities of dead chiefs and sorcerers are 
freely attributed to gods, but it does not follow that each god was 
once a real man, as Sahagun supposes. Euemerism cannot be 
judiciously carried so far as this. Of Huitzilopochtli, the famed 
god, Sahagun says that he was a necromancer, loved " shape- 
shifting," like Odin, metamorphosed himself into animal forms, was 
miraculously conceived, and, among animals, is confused with the 
humming-bird, whose feathers adorned his statues."* This hum- 
ming-bird god should be compared with the Roman Picus (Servius, 
189). That the humming-bird (Nuitziton), which was the god's 
old shape, should become merely his attendant (like the owl of Pallas, 
the mouse of Apollo, the goose of Priapus, the cuckoo of Hera), when 
the god received anthropomorphic form, is an example of a process 
common in all mythologies. Plutarch observes that the Greeks, 
though accustomed to the conceptions of the animal attendants 
of their own gods, were amazed when they found animals worshipped 
as gods by the Egyptians. Mtiller 7 mentions the view that the 
humming-bird, as the most beautiful flying thing, is a proper symbol 
of the heaven, and so of the heaven-god, Huitzilopochtli. This 
vein of symbolism is so easy to work that it must be regarded with 
distrust. Perhaps it is safer to attribute theriomorphic shapes of 

	* Rip Veda, x. 72, 1, 8; Muir, Sanskrit Texts, iv. 13, where the fable 
	from the Satapatha-Brahmana is given. 

	6 The best authorities for the New Zealand myths are the old 
	traditional priestly hymns, collected and translated in the works of 
	Sir George Grey, in Taylor's New Zealand, in Shortland's Traditions 
	of New Zealand (1857), in Bastian's Heiliqe Sage der Polynesicr, and 
	in White's Ancient History of the Maori, 1. 8-13. 

	•See also Bancroft, iii. 288-290, and Acosta, pp. 352-361. 

	7 Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen, p. 592. 

gods, not to symbolism (Zeus was a cuckoo), but to survivals from 
that quality of early thought which draws no line between man and 
god and beast and bird and fish. If spiders may be great gods, why 
not the more attractive humming-birds ? Like many other gods, 
Huitzilopochtli slew his foes at his birth, and hence received names 
analogous to AttfiSs and *6j8os: Tylor (Primitive Culture, ii. 
307) calls Huitzilopochtli an " inextricable compound partheno- 
gcnetic god." His sacrament, when paste idols 01 him were eaten 
by the communicants, was at the winter solstice, whence it may, 
perhaps, be inferred that Huitzilopochtli was not only a war-god 
but a nature-god — in both respects anthropomorphic, and in both 
bearing traces of the time when he was but a humming-bird, as Yehl 
was a raven (Miiller, op. ciU p. 595). As a humming-bird, Huitzilo- 
pochtli led the Aztecs to a new home, as a wolf led the Hirpini, and 
as a woodpecker led the Sabines. Quetzalcoatl, theToltec deity, 
is as much a sparrow (or similar small bird) as Huitzilopochtli is a 
humming-bird. Acosta says he retained the sparrow's head in his 
statue. For the composite character of Quetzalcoatl as a "culture- 
hero " (a more polished version of Qat), asa " nature-god," and 
as a theriomorphic god see Miiller (op. cit. pp. 583-584). Miiller 
frankly recognizes that not only are animals symbols of deity and 
its attributes, not only are they companions and messengers of deity 
(as in the period of anthropomorphic religion), but they have been 
divine beings in and for themselves during the earlier stages of 
thought. The Mexican " departmental " gods answer to those of 
other polytheisms; there is an Aztec Ceres, an Aztec Lucina, an 
Aztec Vulcan, an Aztec Flora, an Aztec Venus. The creative myths 
and sun myths are crude and very early in character. 

Egyptian Myths. — On a much larger and more magnificent scale, 
and on a much more permanent basis, the society of ancient Egypt 
somewhat resembled that of ancient Mexico. The divine myths of 
the two nations had points in common, but there are few topics 
more obscure than Egyptian mythology. Writers are apt to speak 
of Egyptian religion as if it were a single phenomenon of which all 
the aspects could be observed at a given time. In point of fact 
Egyptian religion (conservative though it was) lasted through per- 
haps five thousand years, was subject to innumerable influences, 
historical, ethnological, philosophical, and was variously represented 
by various schools of priests. We cannot take the Platonic specula- 
tions of Iamblichus about the nature and manifestations of Egyptian 
godhead as evidence for the belief of the peoples who first worshipped 
the Egyptian gods an innumerable series of ages before Iamblichus 
and Plutarch. ^ Nor can_ the esoteric and pantheistic theories of 
priests (according to which the various beast-gods were symbolic 
manifestations of the divine essence) be received as an historical 
account of the origin of the local animal-worships. It has already 
been shown that the lowest and least intellectual races indulge in 
local animal-worship, each stock having its parent bird, beast, fish, 
or even plant, or inanimate object. It has also been shown that 
these backward peoples recognize a non-natural race of men or 
animals, or both, as the first fathers, heroes, and, in a sense, gods. 
Such ideas are consonant with, and may be traced to the confused 
and nebulous condition of, savage thought. Precisely the same 
ideas are found at various periods among the ancient Egyptians. 
If we are to regard the Egyptian myths about the gods in animal 
shape, and about the non-natural superhuman heroes, and their 
wars and loves, as esoteric allegories devised by civilized priests, 
perhaps we should also explain Pund-jel, Qat, Quawteaht, the Mantis 
£od, the Spider creator, the Coyote and Raven gods as priestly 
inventions, put forth in a civilized age, and retained by Australians, 
Bushmen, Hottentots, Ahts, Thlinkeets, Papuans, who preserve 
no other vestiges of high civilization. Or we may take the opposite 
view, and regard the story of Osiris and his war with Seth (who shut 
him up in a box and mutilated him) as a dualistic myth, originally 
on the level of the battle between'.Gaunab andTsui-Goab, or between 
Tagar and Suqc. We may regard the local beast- and plant-gods 
of Egypt as survivals of totems and totem-gods like those of Australia, 
India, America, Africa, Siberia and other countries. In this article 
the latter view is adopted. The beast-gods and dualistic and creative 
myths of savages are looked on as the natural product of the savage 
reason and fancy. The same beast-gods and myths in civilized 
Egypt are looked on as survivals from the rude and early condition 
of thought to which such conceptions are natural. 

In the most ancient Egyptian records the gods are not pictorially 
represented, and we have not obtained from these records any 
descriptions of adoration and sacrifice. There is a prayer to the 
Sky on the coffin of the king of Dynasty IV., known as Mycerinus 
to the Greeks. The king describes himself as the child of Sky and 
Earth. He also somewhat obscurely identifies himself with Osiris. 

We thus find Osiris very near the beginning of what is known 
about Egyptian religion. This being is rather a culture-hero, a 
member of a non-natural race of men like Qat or Manabozho, than a 
god. His myth, to be afterwards narrated, is found pictorially 
represented in a tomb and in the late temple of Philae, is frequently 
alluded to in the litanies of the dead about 1400 B.C., is indicated 
with reverent awe by Herodotus, and after the Christian era is 
described at full length by Plutarch. Whether the same myth was 
current in the far more distant days of Mycerinus, it is, of course, 
impossible to say with dogmatic certainty. The religious history 
of Egypt, from perhaps Dynasty X. to Dynasty XX., is interrupted 
by an invasion of Semitic conquerors and Semitic ideas. Prior to 
that invasion the gods, when mentioned in monuments, are always 
represented by animals, and these animals are the object of strictly 
local worship. The name of each god is spelled in hieroglyphs beside 
the beast or bird. The jackal stands for Anup, the hawk for Har, 
the frog for Hekt, the baboon for Tahuti, and Ptah, Asiri, Hesi, 
Nebhat, Hat-hor, Neit, Khnum and Amun-hor are all written out 
phonetically, but never represented in pictures. Different cities 
had their different beast-gods. Pasht, the cat, was the god of 
Bubastis; Apis, the bull, of Memphis; Hapi, the wolf , of Sioot; Ba, 
the goat, of Mendes. The evidence of Herodotus, Plutarch and the 
other writers shows that the Egyptians of each district refused to 
eat the flesh of the animalthey held sacred. So far the identity of 
custom with savage totemism is absolute. Of all the explanations, 
then, of Egyptian animal-worship, that which regards the practice 
as a survival of totemism and of savagery seems the most satis- 
factory. So far Egyptian religion only represented her gods in 
theriomorphic shape. Beasts also appeared in the royal genealogies, 
as if the early Egyptians had filled up the measure of totemism by 
regarding themselves as actually descended from animals. 

With one or two exceptions, " the first (semi-anthropomorphic) 
figures of gods known in the civilized parts ol Egypt are on the granite 
obelisk of Bezig in the Fayytim, erected by Usertesen I. of Dynasty 
XII., and here we find the forms all full-blown at once. The first 
group of deities belongs to a period and a district in which Semitic 
influences had undoubtedly begun to work " (Petrie). From this 
period the mixed and monstrous figures, semi- theriomorphic, semi- 
anthropomorphic, hawk-headed and ram-headed and jackal-headed 
gods become common. This may be attributed to Semitic influence, 
or we may suppose that the process of anthropomorphizing therio- 
morphic gods was naturally developing itself; for Mexico has shown 
us and Greece can show us abundant examples of these mixed 
figures, in which the anthropomorphic god retains traces of his 
theriomorphic past. The heretical worship of the solar disk inter- 
rupted the course of Egyptian religion under some reforming kings, 
but the great and glorious Ramesside Dynasty (XIX.) restored 
" Orus and Isis and the dog Anubis " with the rest of the semi- 
theriomorphic deities. These survived even their defeat by the 
splendid human gods of Rome, and only " fled from the folding 
star of Bethlehem." 

Though Egypt was rich in gods, her literature is not fertile in 
myths. The religious compositions which have survived are, as a 
rule, hymns and litanies, the funereal service, the " Book of the 
Dead." In these works the myths are taken for granted, are 
alluded to in the course of addresses to the divine beings, but, 
naturally, are not told in full. As in the case of the Vedas, hymns 
are poor sources for the study of mythology^ just as the hymns of 
the Church would throw little light on the incidents of the gospel 
story or of the Old Testament. The " sacred legends " which the 
priests or temple servants freely communicated to Herodotus 
are lost through the pious reserve of the traveller. Herodotus 
constantly alludes to the most famous Egyptian myth,that of Osiris, 
and he recognizes the analogies between the Osirian myth and 
mysteries and those of Dionysus. But we have to turn to the very late 
authority of Plutarch (De I side et Osiride) for an account, confessedly 
incomplete and expurgated, of what mythology had to tell about 
the great Egyptian " culture-hero," " daemon, ' and god. Osiris, 
Horus, Typhon (Seth), Isis and Nephthys were the children of Seb 
(whom the Greeks identified with Cronus) ; the myths of their birth 
were peculiarly savage and obscene. Osiris introduced civilization 
into Egypt, and then wandered over the world, making men 
acquainted with agriculture and the arts, as Pund-jel in his humbler 
way did in Australia. On his return Typhon laid a plot for him. 
He had a beautiful carved chest made which exactly fitted Osiris, 
and at an entertainment offered to give it to any one who could lie 
down in it. As soon as Osiris tried, Typhon had the box nailed up, 
and threw it into the Tanaite branch of the Nile. Isis wandered, 
mourning, in search of the body, as Demeter sought Persephone, 
and perhaps in Plutarch's late version some incidents may be 
borrowed from the Eleusinian legend. At length she found the 
chest, which in her absence was again discovered by Typhon. He 
mangled the body of Osiris (as so many gods of all races were mangled), 
and tossed the fragments about. Wherever Isis found a portion 
of Osiris she buried it ; hence Egypt was as rich in graves of Osiris as 
Namaqualand in graves of Heitsi Eibib. The phallus alone she did 
not find, but she consecrated a model thereof; hence (says the myth) 
came the phallus- worship of Egypt. Afterwards Osiris returned 
from the shades, and (in the form of a wolf) urged his son Horus to 
revenge him on Typhon. The gods fought in animal shape (Birch, in 
Wilkinson, iii. 144). Plutarch purposely omits as " too blasphe- 
mous " the legend of the mangling of Horus. Though the graves 
of these non-natural beings are shown, the priests (Dels, et Os. xxi.) 
also show the stars into which they were metamorphosed, as the 
Eskimo and Australians and Aryans of India and Greeks have recog- 
nized in the constellations their ancient heroes. Plutarch remarked 
the fact that the Greek myths of Cronus, of Dionysus, of Apollo and 
the Python, and of Demeter, " all the things that are shrouded in 
mystic ceremonies and are presented in rites," " do not fall short in 
absurdity of the legends about Osiris and Typhon." Plutarch 
naturally presumed that the myths which seem absurd shrouded 
some great moral or physical mystery. But we apply no such 
explanation to similar savage legends, and our theory is that the 
Osirian myth is only one of these retained to the time of Plutarch by 
the religious conservatism of a race which, to the time of Plutarch, 
preserved in full vigour most of the practices of totemism. As a 
slight confirmation of the possibility of this theory we may mention 
that Greek mysteries retained two of the features of savage mysteries. 
The first was the rite of daubing the initiated with clay. 1 Jhis 
custom prevails in African mysteries, in Guiana, among Australians, 
Papuans, and Andaman Islanders. The other custom is the use of 
• the turndun, as the Australians call a little fish-shaped piece^ of 
wood tied to a string, and waved so as to produce a loud booming 
and whirring noise and keep away the profane, especially women. 
It is employed in New Mexico, South Africa, New Zealand and 
Australia. This instrument, the kwws, was also used in Greek 
mysteries. 1 Neither the use of the k&vos nor of the clay can very 
well be regarded as a civilized practice retained by savages. The 
hypothesis that the rites and the stories are savage inventions 
surviving into civilized religion seems better to meet the difficulty. 
That the Osirian myth (much as it was elaborated and allegorized) 
originated in the same sort of fancy as the Tacullie story of the 
dismembered beaver out of whose body things were made is a con- 
clusion not devoid of plausibility. Typhon's later career, " commit- 
ting dreadful crimes out of envy and spite, and throwing all things 
into confusion," was parallel to the proceedings of most of the divine 
beings who put everything wrong, in opposition to the being who 
makes everything right. This is perhaps an early " duahstic " 
myth. 

Among other mythic Egyptian figures we have Ra, who once 
destroyed men in his wrath with circumstances suggestive of the 
Deluge ; Khnum, a demiurge, is represented at Philae as making man 
out of clay on a potter's wheel. Here the wheel is added to the 
Maori conception of the making of man. Khnum is said to have 
reconstructed the limbs of the dismembered Osiris. Ptah is the 
Egyptian Hephaestus; he is represented as a dwarf; men are said 
to have come out of his eye, goofs out of his mouth — a story like that 
of Purusha in the Rig Veda^ As creator of man, Ptah is a frog. 
Bubastis became a cat to avoid the wrath of Typhon. Ra, the sun, 
fought the big serpent Apap, as Indra fought Vrittra. Seb is a 
goose,called the great cackler "; he Jaid the creative egg. 3 

Divine Myths of the Aryans of India. Indra. — The gods of the 
Vedas and Brahmanas (the ancient hymns and canonized ritual-books 
of Aryan India) are, on the whole, of the usual polytheistic type. 
More than many other gods they retain in their titles and attributes 
the character of elemental phenomena personified. That personifica- 
tion is, as a rule, anthropomorphic, but traces of theriomorphic 
personification are still very apparent. The ideas which may be 
gathered about the gods from the hymns are (as is usual in heathen 
religions) without consistency. There is no strict orthodoxy. As 
each bard of each bardic family celebrates his favourite god heis apt 
to make him for the moment the pre-eminent deity of all. This way 
of thinking about the gods leads naturally in the direction of a 
pantheistic monotheism in which each divine being may be regarded 
as a manifestation of the one divine essence. No doubt this point 
of view was attained in centuries extremely remote by sages of the 
civilized Vedic world. It is easy, however, to detect certain peculiar 
characteristics of each god. As among races much less advanced 
in civilization than the Vedic Indians, each of the greater powers 
has his own separate department, however much his worshippers 
may be inclined to regard him as an absolute premier with undisputed 
latitude of personal government. Thus Indra is mainly concerned 
with thunder and other atmospheric phenomena; but Vayu is the 
wind, the Maruts are wind-gods, Agni is fire or the god of fire, and 
so connected with lightning. Powerful as Indra is in the celestial 
world, Mitra and Varuna preside over night and day. Ushas is 
the dawn, and Tvashtri is the mechanic among the gods, correspond- 
ing to the Egyptian Ptah and the Greek Hephaestus. Though 
lofty moral qualities and deep concern about the conduct of men 
are attributed to the gods in the Vedic hymns, yet the hymns contain 
traces (and these are amplified in the ritual books) of a divine 
chronique scandaleuse. In this chronique the gods, like other gods, 
are adventurous warriors, adulterers, incestuous, homicidal, given 
to animal transformations, cowardly, and in fact charged with all 
human vices, and credited with magical powers.* It would be 
difficult to speak too highly of the ethical nobility of many Vedic 
hymns. The " hunger and thirst after righteousness " of the sacred 

	1 Demosthenes, De corona, p. 313, koX KaBaipw tovs reXou/iewi* kclI 

	&TOH&TT03V T$ XTjX4> KCii TOtS TlT&pOlS. 

	1 K&vos ^uXAptov oD ^yrrai t6 trrapTlov, kclI iv rats rcXcrat* kSoveiro 
	fva/knft;. Quoted by Lobeck, Aglaophamus, i. 700, from Bastius 
	ad Gregor., 241, and from other sources; cf. Arnobius, v. c. 19, 
	where the word turbines is the Latin term. 

	•Wilkinson, iii. 62, see note by Dr Birch. A more detailed 
	account of Egyptian religion is given under Egypt. Unfortunately 
	Egyptologists have rarely a wide knowledge of the myths of the lower 
	races, while anthropologists are seldom or never Egyptologists. 

	4 For examples of the lofty morality sometimes attributed to the 
	gods, see Max Miiller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 284; Rig-Veda, ii. 28; 
	lv. 12, 4; viii. 93 seq.; Muir, Sanskrit Texts, v. 218. 

poet recalls the noblest aspirations and regret9 of the Hebrew 
psalmist. But this aspect of the Vedic deities is essentially matter 
for the science of religion rather than of mythology, which is con- 
cerned with the stories told about the gods. Religion is always 
forgetting, or explaining away, or apologizing for these stories. 
Now the Vedic deities, so imposing when regarded as vast natural 
forces (as such forces seem to us), so benignant when appealed to 
as forgivers of sins, have also their mythological aspect. In this 
aspect they are natural phenomena still, but phenomena as originally 
conceived of by the personifying imagination of the savage, and 
credited, like the gods of the Maori or the Australian, with all 
manner of freaks, adventures and disguises. The Veda, it is true, 
does not usually dilate much on the worst of these adventures. 
The Veda contains devotional hymns; we can no more expect much 
narrative here than in the Psalms of David. Again, the religious 
sentiment of the Veda is half-consciously hostile to the stories. As 
M. A. Barth says, " Le sentiment religieux a 6carte" la plupart de 
ces mythes, mais ii ne les a ecartes tons." The Brahmanas, on the 
other hand, later compilations, canonized books for the direction 
of ritual and sacrifice, are rich in senseless and irrational myths. 
Sometimes these myths are probably later than the Veda, mere 
explanations of ritual incidents devised by the priests. Sometimes 
a myth probably older than the Vedas, and maintained in popular 
tradition, is reported in the Brahmanas. The gods in the Veda are 
by no means always regarded as equal in supremacy. There were 
great and small, young and old gods (R. V. 1. 27, 13). Elsewhere 
this is flatly contradicted: " None of you, oh gods, is small or young, 
ye are all great " (R. V. viii. 30, 1). As to the immortality and the 
origin of the gods, there is no orthodox opinion in the Veda. Many 
of the myths of the origin of the divine beings are on a level with the 
Maori theory that Heaven and Earth begat them in the ordinary way. 
Again, the gods were represented as the children of Aditi. This may 
be taken either in a refined sense, as if Aditi were the " infinite 
region from which the solar deities rise, 6 or we may hold with the 
Taittirya-Brahmana 8 that Aditi was a female who, being desirous 
of offspring, cooked a brahmandana offering for the Sadhyas. 
Various other fathers and mothers of the gods are mentioned. 
Some gods, particularly Indra, are said to have won divine rank by 
11 austere fervour *' and asceticism, which is one of the processes 
that makes gods out of mortals even now in India. 7 The gods are 
not always even credited with inherent immortality. Like men, 
they were subject to death, which they overcame in various ways. 
Like most gods, they had struggles for pre-eminence with Titanic 
opponents, the Asuras, who partly answer to the Greek Titans and 
the Hawaiian foes of the divine race, or to the Scandinavian giants 
and the enemies who beset the savage creative beings. Early man, 
living in a state of endless warfare, naturally believes that his gods 
also have their battles. The chief foes of Indra are Vrittra and Ahi, 
serpents which swallow up the waters, precisely as frogs do in Austra- 
lian and Californian and Andaman myths. It has already been 
shown that such creatures, thunder-birds, snakes, dragons, and what 
not, people the sky in the imagination of Zulus, Red Men, Chinese, 
Peruvians, and all the races who believe that beasts hunt the sun 
and moon and cause eclipses. 8 Though hostile to Asuras, Indra 
was once entangled in an intrigue with a woman of that race, accord- 
ing to the Atharva-Veda (Muir, 5. T. v. 82). The gods were less 
numerous than the Asuras, but by a magical stratagem turned some 
bricks into gods (like a creation of new peers to carry a vote) — so says 
the Black Yajur-Veda. 9 

Turning to separate gods, Indra first claims attention, for stories 
of Heaven and Earth are better studied under the heading of myths 
of the origin of things. Indra has this zoomorphic feature in common 
with Heitsi Eibib, the Namaqua god, 10 that his mother, or one of 
his mothers, was a cow (R. V. iv. 18, 1). This statement may be 
a mere way of speaking in the Veda, but it is a rather Hottentot way. 11 
Indra is also referred to as a ram in the Veda, and in one myth this 
ram could fly, like the Greek ram of the fleece of gold. He was 
certainly so far connected with sheep that he and sheep and the 
Kshatriya caste sprang from the breast and arms of Prajapati, a 
kind of creative being. Indra was a great drinker of soma juice; 
a drinking-song by Indra, much bemused with soma, is in R. V. x. 
119. On one occasion Indra got at the soma by assuming the shape 
of a quail. In the Taitt. Samh. (ii. 5; i. 1) Indra is said to have been 
guilty of that most hideous crime, the killing of a Brahmana." 13 
Once, though uninvited, Indra drank some soma that had been 
prepared for another being. The soma disagreed with Indra; part 
of it which was not drunk up became Vrittra the serpent, Indra 's 

	4 Miiller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 230. 
	8 Muir, S. T., v. 55; i. 27. 

	7 See Sir A. Lyall, Asiatic Studies. For Vc^ic examples, see R.-V. 
	x. 167, 1; x. 159, 4; Muir, S. T. v. 15. 

	8 See Tylor, Primitive Culture, i. 288, 329, 356. 

	9 The^ chief authority for the constant strife between gods and 
	Asuras is the Satapatha-Brahmana, of which one volume is translated 
	in Sacred Books of the East (vol. xii.). 

	10 Hahn, Tsunx-Goam, the Supreme Being of the Hottentots, p. 68. 

	11 See Muir, 5. 7\, v. 16, 17, for Indra's peculiar achievements 
	with a cow. 

	" Sacred Books of the East, xii. 1, 48. 

enemy. Indra cut him in two, and made the moon out of half of 
his body. This serpent was a universal devourer of everything and 
everybody, like Kwai Hemm, the all-devourer in Bushman mytho- 
logy. If this invention is a late priestly one, the person who intro- 
duced it into the Satapatha-Brahmana must have reverted to the 
intellectual condition of Bushmen. In the fight with Vrittra, Indra 
lost his energy, which fell to the earth and produced plants and 
shrubs. In the same way plants, among the Iroquois, were made of 
pieces knocked off Chokanipok in his fight with Manabozho. Vines, 
in particular, are the entrails of Chokanipok. In Egypt, wine was 
the blood of the enemies of the gods. The Aryan versions of this 
sensible legend will be found in Satapatha-Brahmana. 1 The civilized 
mind soon wearies of this stuff, and perhaps enough has been said 
to prove that, in the traditions of Vedic devotees, Indra was not a 
god without an irrational element in his myth. Our argument is, 
that all these legends about Indra, of which only a sample is given, 
have no necessary connexion with the worship of a pure nature-god 
as a nature-god would now be constructed by men. The legends 
are survivals of a time in which natural phenomena were regarded, 
not as we regard them, but as persons, and savage persons, Alcheringa 
folk, in fact, and became the centres of legends in the savage manner. 
Space does not permit us to recount the equally puerile and barbarous 
legends of Vishnu, Agni, the loves of Vivasvat in the form of a horse, 
the adventures of Soma, nor the Vedic amours (paralleled in several 
savage mythologies) of Pururavas and Urvasi. 2 
t Dtyine Myths of Greece. — If any ancient people was thoroughly 
civilized the Greeks were that people. Yet in the mythology and 
religion of Greece we find abundant survivals of savage manners and 
of savage myths. As to the religion, it is enough to point to the 
traces of human sacrifice and to the worship of rude fetish stones. 
The human sacrifices at Salamis in Cyprus and at Alos in Achaia 
Phthiotis may be said to have continued almost to the conversion 
of the empire (Grote i. 125, ed. 1869). Pausanias seems to have 
found human sacrifices to Zeus still lingering in Arcadia in the 2nd 
century of our era. " On this altar on the Lycaean hill they sacrifice 
to Zeus in a manner that may not be spoken, and little liking had I 
to pry far into that sacrifice. But let it be as^ it is, and as it hath 
been from the beginning.*' Now " from the beginning " the sacrifice, 
according to Arcadian tradition, had been z human sacrifice. In 
other places there were manifest commutations of human sacrifice, 
as at tne altar of Artemis the Implacable at Patrae, where Pausanias 
saw the wild beasts being driven into the flames. 3 Many other exam- 
ples of human sacrifice are mentioned in Greek legend. Pausanias 
gives full and interesting details of the worship of rude stones, 
the oldest worship, he says, among the Greeks. Almost every 
temple had its fetish stone on a level with the pumice stone, which is 
the Poseidon of the Mangaians. 4 _ The Argives had a large stone 
called Zeus Cappotas. The oldest idol of the Thespians was a rude 
stone. Another has been found beneath the pedestal of Apollo 
in Delos. In Achaean Pharae were thirty squared stones, each 
named by the name of a god. Among monstrous images of the gods 
which Pausanias, who saw them, regarded as the oldest idols, were 
the three-headed Artemis, each head being that of an animal, the 
Dcmeter with the horse's head, the_ Artemis with the fish's tail, the 
Zeus with three eyes, the ithyphallic Hermes, represented after the 
fashion of the Priapic figures in paintings on the walls of caves 
among the Bushmen. We also hear of the bull and the bull-footed 
Dionysus. Phallic and other obscene emblems were carried abroad 
in processions in Attica both by women and men. The Greek 
custom of daubing _ people all over with clay in the mysteries 
results as we saw in the mysteries of negroes, Australians and 
American races, while the Australian turndun was exhibited 
among the ^oys at the mysteries of Dionysus. The survivals 
of rites, objects of worship, and sacrifices like these prove that 
religious conservatism in Greece retained much of savage practice, 
ana the Greek mythology^ is not less full of ideas familiar to the 
lowest races.' The authorities for Greek mythology are numerous 
and various in character. The oldest sources as literary docu- 
ments are the Homeric and Hesiodic poems. In the Iliad and 
Odyssey the gods and goddesses are beautiful, powerful and immortal 
anthropomorphic beings. The name of Zeus (Skr. Dyaus) clearly 
indicates his connexion with the sky. But in Homer he has long 
ceased to be merely the sky conceived of as a person; he is the 

	1 Sacred Books of the East, xii. 176, 177. 

	l On the whole subject, Dr Muir's Ancient Sanskrit Texts, with 
	'translations, Ludwig's translation of the Rig Veda, the version 
	of the Satapatha-Brahmana already referred to, and the translation 
	of the Aitareya-Brahmana by Haug, are the sources most open to 
	English readers. Max M tiller's translation of the Rig Veda unfor- 
	tunately only deals with the hymns to the Maruts. The Indian 
	epics and the Puranas belong to a much later date, and are full of 
	-deities either unknown to or undeveloped in the Rig Veda and the 
	Brahmanas. ^ It is much to be regretted that the Atharva-Veda, 
	which contains the magical formulae and incantations of the Vedic 
	Indians, is still untranslated, though, by the very nature of its theme, 
	it must containjnatter of extreme antiquity and interest. 

	6 Pausanias iii. 16; vii. 18. Human sacrifice to Dionysus, Paus. 
	vii. 21 ; Plutarch, De Is. et Os. 35; Porphyry, De Abst. ii. 55. 
	4 Gill, Myths and Songs from the South Pacific^ p. 60. 

chief personage in a society of immortals, organized on the type of 
contemporary human society. " There is a great deal of human 
nature ' in his wife Hera (Skr. Svar, Heaven). 6 It is to be remem- 
bered that philologists differ widely as to the origin and meaning of 
the names of almost all the Greek gods. Thus the light which the 
science of language throws on Greek myths is extremely uncertain. 
Hera is explained as " the feminine side of heaven " by some authori- 
ties. The quarrels of Hera with Zeus (which are a humorous 
anthropomorphic study in Homer) are represented as a way of speak- 
ing about winter and rough weather. The other chief Homeric 
deities are Apollo and Artemis, children of Zeus by Leto, a mortal 
mother raised to divinity. Apollo is clearly connected in some way 
with light, as his name <£o?#>s seems to indicate, and with purity, 6 
Homer knows the legend that a giant sought to lay violent hands on 
Leto {Od. xi. 580). Smintheus, one of Apollo's titles in Homer, is 
connected with the field-mouse (ajuktfos), one of his many sacred 
animals. His names, AOkios, J^vKTjyevTjs, were connected by an- 
tiquity with the wolf, by most modern writers with the light. 
According to some legends Leto had been a were-wolf. 7 7The whole 
subject of the relations of Greek gods to animals is best set forth in 
the words of Plutarch (De Is. et Os. lxxi.), where he says that the 
Egyptians worship actual beasts, " whereas the Greeks both speak 
and believe correctly, saying that the dove is the sacred animal of 
Aphrodite, the raven of Apollo, the do£ of Artemis," and so forth. 
Each Greek god had a small menagerie of sacred animals, and it 
may be conjectured that these animals were originally the totems 
of various stocks, subsumed into the worship of the anthropomorphic 
god.*' For the new theory of vegetation spirits and corn spirits see 
The Golden Bough. Apollo, in any case, is the young and beautiful' 
archer-god of Homer; Artemis, his sister, is the goddess of archery, 
who takes her pastime in the chase. She holds no considerable place 
in the Iliad ; in the Odyssey, Nausicaa is compared to her, as to the 
pure and lovely lady of maidenhood. Her name is commonly 
connected with bprenfa — pure, unpolluted. Her close relations 
(un-Homeric) with the bear and bear- worship have suggested a 
derivation from &pktos — "Ap/crejuts. In Homer her " gentle shafts " 
deal sudden and painless death; she is a beautiful Azrael. A much 
more important daughter of Zeus in Homer is Athene, the " grey- 
eyed " or (as some take_ yXavK&iris, rather improbably) the " owl- 
headed "goddess. Her birth from the head of Zeus is not explicitly 
alluded to in Homer. 3 In Homer, Athene is a warlike maiden, the 
patron-goddess of wisdom and manly resolution. In the twenty- 
second book of the Odyssey she assumes the form of a swallow, and 
she can put on the shape 01 any man. She bears the aegis, the awful 
shield of Zeus. Another Homeric child of Zeus, or, according to 
Hesiod (Th. 927), of Hera alone,is Hephaestus, the lame craftsman 
and artificer. In the Iliad 9 will be found some of the crudest 
Homeric myths. Zeus or Hera throws Hephaestus or Ate out of 
heaven, as in the Iroquois myth of the tossing from heaven of 
Ataentsic. There is, as usual, no agreement as to the etymology of 
the name of Hephaestus. Preller inclines to a connexion with 
i$<£0tu, to kindle fire, but Max Muller differs from this theory. 
About the close relations of Hephaestus with fire there can be no 
doubt. He is a rough, kind, good-humoured being in the Iliad. 
In the Odyssey he is naturally annoyed by the adultery of his wife, 
Aphrodite, with Ares. Ares is a god with whom Homer has no 
sympathy. He is a son of Hera, and detested by Zeus {Iliad, v. 890). 
He is cowardly in war, and on one occasion was shut up for years 
in a huge brazen pot. This adventure was even more, ignominious 
than that of Poseidon and Apollo when they were compelled to serve 
Laomedon for hire. The payment he refused, and threatened to 
" cut off their ears with the sword " (Iliad, xxi. 455). Poseidon is to 
the sea what Zeus is to the air, and Hades to the underworld in 
Homer. 10 His own view of his social position may be stated in his 
own words (Iliad, xv. 183, 211). *' Three brethren are we, and sons 
of Cronus, sons whom Rhea bare, even Zeus and myself, and Hades 
is the third, the ruler of the people in the underworld. And in 
three lots were all things divided, and each drew a lot of his own, 11 and 
to me fell the hoary sea, and Hades drew the mirky darkness, and 
Zeus the wide heaven in clear air and clouds, but the earth and high 
Olympus are yet common to all." * 

Zeus, however, is, as Poseidon admits, the elder-born, and there- 
fore the revered head of the family. Thus Homer adopts the system 

	6 Cf . Preller, Griechische Mythologie,*\. 128, note 1, for this and 
	other philological conjectures. 

	6 The derivation of 'AtAXX^ remains obscure. The derivation 
	of Leto from \adeiv, and the conclusion that her name means " the 
	concealer " — that is, the night, whence the sun is born — is disputed 
	by Curtius (Preller i. 190, 191, note 4), but appears to be accepted 
	by Max Muller (Selected Essays, i. 386) Latmos being derived from 
	the same root as Leto, Latona, the night. 

	7 Aristotle, H.An.6; Aelian, N. A. iv. 4. 

	8 Her name, as usual, is variously interpreted by various etymolo- 
	gists. 

	9 xiv. 257; xviii. J95; xix. 91, 132. 

	10 The root of his name is sought in such words as t6tos and 
	iroran6s. 

	11 We learn from the Odyssey (xiv. 209) that this was the custom 
	of sons on the death of their father. 

of primogeniture, while Hesiod is all for the opposite and probably 
earlier custom of Jungsten-recht, and makes supreme Zeus the 
youngest of the sons of Cronus. Among the other gods Dionysus 
is but slightly alluded to in Homer as the son of Zeus and Semele, 
as the object of persecution, and as connected with the myth of 
Ariadne. The name of Hermes is derived from various sources, as 
from bppav and 6p/^, or, by Max Miiller, the name is connected 
with Sarameya (Sky). If he had originally an elemental character, 
it is now difficult to distinguish, though interpreters connect him 
with the wind. He is the messenger of the gods, the bringer of good 
luck, and the conductor of men's souls down the dark ways of death. 
In addition to the great Homeric gods, the poet knows a whole 
" Olympian consistory " of deities, nymphs, nereids, sea-gods and 
goddesses, river-gods, Iris the rainbow goddess, Sleep, Demeter 
who lay with a mortal, Aphrodite the goddess of love, wife of Hephaes- 
tus and leman of Ares, and so forth. As to the origin of the gods, 
Homer is not very explicit. He is acquainted with the existence 
of an older dynasty now deposed, the dynasty of Cronus and the 
Titans. In the Iliad (viii. 478) Zeus says to Hera, " For thine anger 
reck I not, not even though thou go to the nethermost bounds of 
earth and sea, where sit Iapetus and Cronus . . . and deep Tartarus 
is round about them." " The gods below that are with Cronus " are 
mentioned (//. xiv. 274; xv. 225). Rumours of old divine wars 
echo in the Iliad , as (i. 400) where it is said that when the other 
immortals revolted against and bound Zeus, Thesis brought to his 
aid Aegaeon of the hundred arms. The streams of Oceanus (//. xiv. 
246) are spoken of as the source of all the gods, and in the same book 
(290) " Oceanus and mother Tethys " are regarded as the parents 
of the immortals. Zeus is usually called Cronion and Cronides, 
which Homer certainly understood to mean " son of Cronus,'* yet it 
is expressly stated that Zeus " imprisoned Cronus beneath the earth 
and the unvintaged sea." The whole subject is only alluded to 
incidentally. On the whole it may be said that the Homeric deities 
are powerful anthropomorphic beings, departmental rulers, united 
by the ordinary social and family ties of the Homeric age, capable 
of pain and pleasure, living on heavenly food, but refreshed by the 
sacrifices of men (Od. v. ioo, 102), able to' assume all forms at will, 
and to intermarry and propagate the species with mortal men and 
women. Their past has been stormy, and their ruler has attained 
power after defeating and mediatizing a more ancient dynasty of his 
own kindred. 

From Hesiod we receive a much more elaborate — probably a 
more ancient, certainly a more barbarous — story of the gods and 
their origin. In the beginning the gods (here used in a wide sense 
to denote an early non-natural race) were begotten by Earth and 
Heaven, conceived of as beings with human parts and passions 
(Hesiod, Theog. 45). This idea recurs in Maori, Vedic and Chinese 
mythology. Heaven and Earth, united in an endless embrace, 
produced children which never saw the light. In New Zealand, 
Chinese, Vedic, Indian and Greek myths the pair had to be sundered. 1 
Hesiod enumerates the children whom Earth bore " when couched 
in love with Heaven." They are Ocean, Coeus, Crius, Hyperion, 
Iapetus, Theia, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Tethys and the 
youngest, Cronus, " and he hated his glorious father." Others of 
this early race were the Cyclopes, Bronte, Sterope and Arge, and 
three children of enormous strength, Cottus, Briareus (Aegaeon) 
and Gyes, each with one hundred hands and fifty heads.-; Uranus 
detested his offspring, and hid them in crannies of Earth. Earth 
excited Cronus to attack the father, whom he castrated with a 
sickle. From the blood of Uranus (this feature is common in Red 
Indian and Egyptian myths) were born furies, giants, ash-nymphs 
and Aphrodite. A number of monsters, as Echidna, Geryon and 
the hound of hell, were born of the loves of various | elemental 
powers. The chief stock of the divine species was continued by 
the marriage of Rhea (probably another form of the Earth) with 
Cronus. . Their children were Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades and 
Poseidon. All these Cronus swallowed; and this " swallow-myth " 
occurs in Australia, among the Bushmen, in Guiana, in Brittany 
(where Gargantua did the swallow-trick) and elsewhere. At last 
Rhea bore Zeus, and gave Cronus a stone in swaddling bands, 
which he disposed of in the usual way. Zeus grew up, administered 
an emetic to Cronus (some say Metis did this), and had the satis- 
faction of seeing all his brothers and sisters disgorged alive. The 
stone came forth first, and Pausanias saw it at Delphi (Paus. x. 24). 
Then followed the wars between Zeus and the gods he had rescued 
from the maw of Cronus against the gods of the elder branch, the 
children of Uranus and Gaea — Heaven and Earth. The victory 
remained with the younger branch, the immortal Olympians^ of 
Homer. The system of Hesiod is a medley of later physical 
speculation and of poetic allegory, with matter which we, at least, 
regard as savage survivals, like the mutilation of Heaven and the 
swallow-myth. 2 

	1 See Tylor, Prim. Cult, i. 326. 

	1 Bleek, Bushman Folk-Lore, pp. 6-8. Max Miiller suggests 
	another theory {Selected Essays, i. 460) : " Kp6ror did not exist 
	till long after Z«6s in Greece." The name Kporltav, or Kpovlfys, 
	looks like a patronymic. Miiller, however, thinks it originally 
	meant only connected with time, existing through all time. 
	Very much later the name was mistaken for a genuine patronymic, 

In Homer and in Hesiod myths enter the region of literature, 
and become, as it were, national. But it is probable that the local 
myths of various cities and temples, of the " sacred chapters " 
which were told by the priests to travellers and in the mysteries to 
the initiated, were older in form than the epic and national myths. 
Of these " sacred chapters " we have fragments and hints in Hero- 
dotus, Pausanias, in the mythographers, like Apollodorus, in the 
tragic poets, and in the ancient scholia or notes on the classics. 
From these sources come almost all the more inhuman, bestial 
and discreditable myths of the gods. In these we more distinctly 
perceive the savage element. The gods assume animal forms: 
Cronus becomes a horse, Rhea a mare ; Zeus begets separate families 
of men in the shape of a bull, an ant, a serpent, a swan. His mistress 
from whom the Arcadians claim descent becomes a she-bear. It 
is usual with mythologists to say that Zeus is the " All-Father," and 
that his amours are only a poetic way of stating that he is the parent 
of men. But why does he assume so many animal shapes ? Why 
did various royal houses claim descent from the ant, the swan, the 
she-bear, the serpent, the horse and so forth ? We have already 
seen that this is the ordinary pedigree of savage stocks in Asia, 
Africa, Australia and America, while animals appear among Irish 
tribes and in Egyptian and ancient English genealogies.* It is a 
plausible hypothesis that stocks which once claimed descent from 
animals, sans phrase, afterwards regarded the animals as avatars 
of Zeus. In the same way " the Minas, a non- Aryan tribe of Rajpu- 
tana, used to worship the pig; when the Brahmans got a turn at 
them, the pig became an avatar of Vishnu " (Lyall, Asiatic Studies). 
The tales of divine cannibalism to which Pindar refers with awe, 
the mutilation of Dionysus Zagreus, the unspeakable abominations 
of Dionysus, the loves of Hera in the shape of a cuckoo, the divine 
powers of metamorphosing men and *women into beasts and stars 
— these tales come to us as echoes of the period of savage thought. 
Further evidence on this point will be given below in a classification 
of the principal mythic^ legends. The general conclusion is that 
many of the Greek deities were originally elemental, the elements 
being personified in accordance with the laws of savage imagina- 
tions.^ But we cannot explain each detail in the legends as a myth 
of this or that natural phenomenon or process as understood by 
ourselves. Various stages of late and early fancy have contributed 
to the legends. Zeus is the sky, but not our sky ; he had originally 
a personal character, and that a savage or barbarous character. 
He probably attracted into his legend stories that did not origi- 
nally belong to him. He became anthropomorphic, and his myth 
was handled by local priests, by family bards, by national poets, 
by early philosophers. His legend is a complex embroidery on a 
very ancient tissue. The other divine myths are equally complex. 

See L. R. Farnell, Cults of the Greek States; Miss Jane Harrison, 
Prolegomena to Greek Religion; and Frazer, The Golden Bough, 
especially as regards the vegetable or " probably arboreal " aspect 
of Zeus. 

Scandinavian Divine Myths. — The Scandinavian myths of the 
gods are numerous and interesting, but the evidence on which they 
nave reached us demands criticism for which we lack space. That 
there are in the Eddas and Sagas early ideas and later ideas tinged 
by Christian legend seems indubitable, but philological and historical 
learning^has by no means settled the questions of relative purity 
and antiquity lin the myths. The Eddie songs, according to F. Y. 
Powell, one of the editors of the Corpus poeticum septentrionale 
(the best work on the subject), " cannot date earlier " in their 
present form " than the 9th century," and may be vaguely placed 
between a.d. 800-1100. The collector of the fEdda probably 
had the old poems recited to him in the 13th century, and where 
there was a break in the memory of the reciters the lacuna was 
filled up in prose. " As one goes through the poems, one is ever 
and anon face to face with a myth of the most childish and barbaric 
type," # which " carries one back to prae-Aryan days." Side by 
side with these old stories come fragments of a different stratum 
of thought, Christian ideas, the belief in a supreme God. the notion 
of Doomsday. The Scandinavian cosmogonic myth (with its 
parallels among races savage and civilized) is given elsewhere. 
The most important god is Odin, the son of Bestla and Bor, the 
husband of Frigg, the father of Balder and many other sons, the 
head of the Aesir stock of gods. Odin's name is connected with 
that of Wuotan, and referred to the Old High-German verb watan 
wuot = meare, cum impetu ferri (Grimm, Teut. Myth., Eng. transl., 
and " Zeus the ancient of days " became " Zeus the son of Cronus." 
Having thus got a Cronus, the Greeks — and " the misunderstanding 
could have happened in Greece only " — needed a myth of Cronus. 
They therefore ' invented or adapted the "swallow-myth" so 
familiar to Bushmen and Australians. This singular reversion to 
savagery itself needs some explanation. But the hypothesis that 
Cronus is a late derivation from KpovtSrjs and KpovUav is by no 
means universally accepted. Others derive Kp6ros from Kpaivco, 
and connect it with Kpbvia, a kind of harvest-home festival. 
Schwartz (Prdhistorisch-anthropologische Studien) readily proves 
Cronus to be the storm, swallowing the clouds. Perhaps we may 
say of Schwartz's view, as he says of Preller's — " das ist Gedanken- 
spiel, aber nimmermehr Mythologie." 

	1 Elton, Origins of English History, pp. 298-301. 

i. 131). Odin would thus (if we admit the etymology) be the 
swift goer, the " ganger," and it seems superfluous to make him 
(with Grimm) " the all-powerful, all-permeating being,*' a very 
abstract and scarcely an early conception. Odin's brethren (in 
GylfVs Mocking) are Vile and Ve, who with him slew Ymir the 
giant, and made all things out of the fragments of his body. They 
also made man out of two stocks. In the Hava-Mal Odin claims 
for himself most of the attributes of the medicine-man. In Loka 
Senna, Loki, the evil god, says that " Odin dealt in magic in 
Samsey." The goddess Frigg remarks, " Ye should never talk of 
your old doings before men, of what ye two Aesir went through in 
old times." But many relics of these " old times," many traces 
of the medicine-man and the " skin-shifter," survive in the myth of 
Odin. When he stole Suttung's mead (which answers somewhat 
to nectar and the Indian soma), he flew away in the shape of an 
eagle. 1 The hawk is sacred to Odin ; one of his names is " the 
Raven-god." He was usually represented as one-eyed, having 
left an eye in pawn that he might purchase a draught from Mimir's 
well. This one eye is often explained as the sun. Odin's wife 
was Frigg; their sons were Thor (the thunder-god) and Balder, 
whose myth is well known in English poetry. The gods were 
divided into two — not always friendly — stocks, the Aesir and Vanir. 
Their relations are, on the whole, much more amicable than those 
of the Asuras and Devas in Indian mythology. Not necessarily 
immortal, the gods restored their vigour by eating the apples of 
Iduna. Asa Loki was a being of mixed race, half god, half gianti 
and wholly mischievous and evil. His legend includes animal 
metamorphoses of the most obscene character. In the shape of 
a mare he became the mother of the eight-legged horse of Odin. 
He borrowed the hawk-dress of Freya, when he recovered the 
apples of Iduna. Another" Eddie god, Hoene, is described in 
phrases from lost poems as " the long-legged one," " lord of the 
ooze," and his name is connected with that of the crane. The con- 
stant enemies pi the gods, the giants, could also assume animal 
forms. Thus in Thiodolf's Haust-long (composed after the settle- 
ment of Iceland) we read about a shield on which events from myth- 
ology were painted; among these was the flight of " giant Thiazzi 
in an ancient eagle's feathers." The god Herindal and Loki once 
fought a battle in the shapes of seals. On the whole, the Scan- 
dinavian gods are a society on an early human model, of beings 
indifferently human, animal and divine — some of them derived 
from elemental forces personified, holding sway over the elements, 
and skilled in sorcery. Probably after the viking days came in the 
conceptions of the last war of gods, and the end of all, and the theory 
of Odin All-Father as a kind of emperor in the heavenly world. 
The famous tree that lives through all the world is regarded as 
" foreign, Christian, and confined to few poems." There is, almost 
undoubtedly, a touch of the Christian dawn on the figure and 
myth of the pure and beloved and ill-fated god Balder, and his 
descent into hell. The whole subject is beset with critical diffi- 
culties, and we have chiefly noted features which can hardly be 
regarded as late, and which correspond with widely distributed 
mythical ideas. 

Dasent's Prose or Younger Edda (Stockholm, 1842); the Corpus 
Septentrionale already referred to; C. F. Keary's Mythology of the 
Eddas (1882); Pigott's Manual of Scandinavian Mythology (1838); 
and Laing's Early Kings of Norway may be consulted by English 
students. 

Classification of Myths. — It is now necessary to cast a hasty 
glance over the chief divisions of myths. These correspond to 
the chief problems which the world presents to the curiosity of 
untutored men. They ask themselves (and the answers are 
given in myths) the following questions: What is the Origin 
of the World ? The Origin of Man ? Whence came the Arts 
of Life? Whence the Stars? Whence the Sun and Moon? 
What is the Origin of Death? How was Fire procured by Man? 
The question of the origin of the marks and characteristics of 
various animals and plants has also produced a class of myths 
in which the marks are said to survive from some memorable 
adventure, or the plants and animals to be metamorphosed 
human beings. Examples of all these myths are found among 
savages and in the legends of the ancient civilizations. A few 
such examples may now be given. 

Myths of the Origin of the World.— We have found it difficult to 
keep myths of the gods apart from myths of the origin of the world 
and of man, because gods are frequently regarded as creative 
powers. The origin of things is a problem which has everywhere 

	1 Indra was a hawk when, " being well-winged, he carried to 
	men the food tasted by the gods " (R. V. iv. 26, 4). Yehl, the 
	Tlingit god-hero, was a raven or a crane when he stole the water 
	(Bancroft iii. 100-102). The prevalence of animals, or of god- 
	animals, in myths of the stealing of water, soma and fire, is very 
	remarkable. Among the Andaman Islanders, a kingfisher steals 
	fire for men from the god Puluga {Anthrop. Journal, November 
	1882). 

exercised thought, and been rudely solved in myths. These vary- 
in quality with the civilization of the races in which they are current, 
but the same ideas which we proceed to state pervade all cosmo- 
gonical myths, savage and civilized. All these legends waver 
between the theory of creation, or rather of manufacture, and the 
theory of evolution. The earth, as a rule, is supposed to have 
grown out of some original matter, perhaps an animal, perhaps an 
egg which floated on the waters, perhaps a fragment of soil fished 
up out of the floods by a beast or a god. But this conception does 
not exclude the idea that many of the things in the world — minerals, 
plants, people, and what not — are fragments of the frame of an 
animal or non-natural magnified man, or are excretions from the 
body of a god. We proceed to state briefly the various forms of 
these ideas. The most backward races usually assume the prior 
existence of the earth. 

The aborigines of the northern parts of Victoria (Australia) 
believe that the earth was made by Pund-jel, the bird-creator, 
who sliced the valleys with a knife. Another Australian theory is 
that the men of a previous race, the Nooralie (very old ones), made 
the earth. 

The problem of the origin of the world seems scarcely to have 
troubled the Bushmen. They know about " men who brought 
the sun," but their doctrines are revealed in mysteries, and Qing^ 
the informant of Mr Orpen {Capejdonthly Magazine, July 1874), 
14 did not dance that dance " — that is, had not been initiated into- 
all the secret doctrines of his tribe. According to Qing, creation 
was the work of Cagn (the mantis insect), " he gave orders and 
caused all things to appear.*' Elsewhere in the myth Cagn made 
or manufactured things by his skill. 

As a rule the most backward races, while rich in myths of the 
origin of men, animals, plants, stones and stars, do not say much 
about the making of the world. Among people a little more ad- 
vanced, the earth is presumed to have grown out of the waters. In 
the Iroquois myth (Lafitau, Mceurs des sauvages, 1724), a heavenly 
woman was tossed out of heaven, and fell on a turtle, which 
developed into the world. Another North- American myth assumes 
a single island in the midst of the waters, and this island grew into- 
the world. The Navaho and the Digger Indians take earth for 
granted as a starting-point in their myths. The Winnebagos, not 
untouched by Christian doctrine, do not go farther back. The 
Great Manitou awoke and found himself alone. He took a piece of 
his body and a piece of earth and made a man. Here the existence 
of earth is assumed (Bancroft iv. 228). Even in Guatemala, 
though the younger sons of a divine race succeed in making the 
earth where the elder son (as usual) failed, they all had a supply of 
clay as first material. The Pima, a Central-American tribe, say 
the earth was made by a powerful being, and at first appeared 
" like a spider's web." This reminds one of the Ananzi or spider 
creator of West Africa. The more ^metaphysical Tacullies of 
British Columbia say that in the beginning nought existed but 
water and a musk-rat. The musk-rat sought his food at the 
bottom of the water, and his mouth was frequently filled with mud. 
This he kept spitting out, and so formed an island, which developed 
into the world. Among the Tinneh, the frame of a dog (which 
could assume the form of a handsome young man) became the first 
material of most things. The dog, like Osiris, Dionysus, Purusha- 
and other gods, was torn to pieces by giants ; the fragments became 
many of the things in the world (Bancroft i. 106). Even here the 
existence of earth for the dog to live in is assumed. 

Coming to races more advanced in civilization, we find the New 
Zealanders in possession of ancient hymns in which the origin of 
things is traced back to nothing, to darkness, and to a metaphysical 
process from nothing to something, from being to becoming. The 
hymns may be read in Sir George Grey's Polynesian Mythology, and 
in Taylor's New Zealand. It has been suggested that these hymns 
bear traces of Buddhist and Indian influence; in any case, they are 
rather metaphysical than mystical. Myth comes in when the 
Maoris represent Rangi and Papa, Heaven and Earth, as two vast 
beings, male and female, united in a secular embrace, and finally 
severed by their children, among whom Tane Mahuta takes the 
part of Cronus in the Greek myth. The gods were partly elemental, 
partly animal in character; the lists of their titles show that every 
human crime was freely attributed to them. In the South Sea 
Islands, generally, the fable of the union and seoaration of Heaven 
and Earth is current; other forms will be found in Gill's Myths and 
Songs from the South Pacific. 

The cosmogonic myths of the Aryans of India are peculiarly 
interesting, as we find in the Vedas and Brahmanas and Puranas- 
almost every fiction familiar to savages side by side with the most 
abstract metaphysical speculations. We have the theory that 
earth grew, as in the Iroquois story of the turtle, from a being 
named Uttanapad (Muir v. 335). We find that Brahma naspati 
11 blew the gods forth from his mouth," and one of the gods, 
Tvashtri, the mechanic among the deities, is credited with having 
fashioned the earth and the heaven (Muir v. 354). The " Purusha 
Sukta," the 90th hymn of the tenth book of the Jtfg Veda, gives us 
the Indian version of the theory that all things were made out of 
the mangled limbs of Purusha, a magnified non-natural man, who- 
was sacrificed by the gods. As this hymn gives an account of the 
origin of the castes (which elsewhere are scarcely recognized in the 
Rig Veda), it is sometimes regarded as a late addition. But we can 
scarcely think the main conception late, as it is so widely scattered 
that it meets us in most mythologies, including those of Chaldaea 
and Egypt, and various North-American tribes. Not satisfied 
with this myth, the Aryans of India accounted for the origin of 
species in the following barbaric style. A being named Purusha 
was alone in the world. He differentiated himself into two beings, 
husband and wife. The wife, regarding union with her producer 
as incest, fled from his embraces as Nemesis did from those of 
Zeus, and Rhea from Cronus, assuming various animal disguises. 
The husband pursued in the form of the male of each animal, and 
from these unions sprang the various species of beasts (Satapatha- 
Brahmana, xiv. 4, 2; Muir i. 25). The myth of the cosmic egg 
from which all things were produced is also current in the Brah- 
manas. In the Puranas we find the legend of many successive 
creations and destructions of the world a myth of world-wide 
distribution. 

As a rule, destruction by a deluge is the most favourite myth, 
but destructions by fire and wind and by the wrath of a god are 
common in Australian, Peruvian and Egyptian tradition. The 
idea that a boar, or a god in the shape of a boar, fished up a bit of 
earth, which subsequently became the world, out of the waters, is 
very well known to the Aryans of India, and recalls the feats of 
American musk-rats and coyotes already described. 1 The tortoise 
from which all things sprang, in a myth of the Satapatha-Brahmana, 
reminds us of the Iroquois turtle. The Greek and Mangaian myth 
of the marriage of Heaven and Earth and its dissolution is found 
in the Aitareya-Brahmana (Haug's trans, ii. 308; Rig Veda, i. lxii.). 

So much for the Indian cosmogonic myths, which are a collection 
of ideas familiar to savages, blended with sacerdotal theories and 
ritual mummeries. The philosophical^ theory of the origin of things, 
a hymn of remarkable stateliness, is in Rig Veda, x. 129. The 
Scandinavian cosmogonic myth starts from the abyss, Ginnungagap, 
a chaos of ice, from which, as it thawed, was produced the giant 
Ymir. Ymir is the Scandinavian Purusha. A man and woman 
sprang from his armpit, like Athene from the head of Zeus. A 
cow licked the hoar-frost, whence rose Bur, whose children, Odin, 
Vile and Ve, slew the giant Ymir. " Of his flesh they formed the 
earth, of his blood seas and waters, of his bones mountains, of his 
teeth rocks and stones, of his hair all manner of plants." This is 
the story in the Prose Edda, derived from older songs, such as the 
Grimnersmal. However the distribution of this singular myth may 
be explained, its origin can scarcely be sought in the imagination 
of races higher in culture than the Tinneh and Tacullies, among 
whom dogs and beavers are the theriomorphic form of Purusha or 
Ymir. -> * *^ 

Myths of the Origin oj Man. — These partake of the conceptions 
of evolution and of creation. Man was made out of clay by a super- 
natural being. Australia: man was made by Pund-jel. New 
Zealand: man was made by Tiki; " he took red clay, and- kneaded 
it with his own blood." Mangaia: the woman of the abyss made 
a child from a piece of flesh plucked out of her own side. Melanesia: 
" man was made of clay, red from the marshy side of Vanua Levu"; 
woman was made by Qat of willow twigs. Greece: men were 
TrXcur/xara injXov, figures Hbaked in clay by Prometheus. 2 India: 
men were made after many efforts, in which the experimental 
beings did not harmonize with their environment, by Prajapati. 
In another class of myths, man was evolved out of the lower animals 
— lizards in Australia; coyotes, beavers, apes and other beasts in 
America. The Greek myths of the descent of the Arcadians, 
Myrmidons, children of the swan, the cow, and so forth, may be 
compared. Yet again, men came out of trees or plants or rocks: 
as from the Australian wattle-gum, the Zulu bed of reeds, the great 
tree of the Ovahereros, the rock of the tribes in Central Africa, the 
cave of Bushman and North- American and Peruvian myth, " from 
tree or stone " {Odyssey, xix. 163). This view was common among 
the Greeks, who boasted of being autochthonous. The Cephisian 
marsh was one scene of man's birth according to a fragment of 
Pindar, who mentions Egyptian and Libyan legends of the same 
description. 

Myths of the Arts of Life. — These are almost unanimously 
attributed to " culture-heroes," beings theriomorphic or anthropo- 
morphic, who, like Pund-jel, Qat, Quawteaht, Prometheus, 
Manabozho, Quetzalcoatl, Cagn and the rest, taught men the use 
of the bow, the processes (wnere known) of pottery, agriculture 
(as Demeter), the due course of the mysteries, divination, and 
everything else they knew. Commonly the teacher disappears 
mysteriously. He is often regarded by modern mythologists as 
the sun. 

Star Myths. — " The stars came otherwise," says Browning's 
Caliban. In savage and civilized myths they are usually meta- 
morphosed men, women and beasts. I n _ Australia, the Pleiades, 
as in Greece, were girls. Castor and Pollux in Greece, as in Australia, 
were young men. Our Bear was a bear, according to Charlevoix 
and Lafitau, among the North-American Indians; the Eskimo, 

	1 Black Yajur-Veda and Satapatha- Brahmana; Muir, i. 52. 

	1 Aristophanes, Aves, 686; Etym. Magn., s.v. 'Ubviov. Pausanias 
	saw the clay (Paus. x. iv.). The story is also quoted by Lactantius 
	from Hesiod. 

according to Egede, who settled the Danish colony in Greenland, 
regarded the stars " very nonsensically," as "so many of their 
ancestors"; the Egyptian priests showed Plutarch the stars that 
had been I sis and Osiris. Aristophanes, in the Pax, shows us that 
the belief in the change of men into stars survived in his own day 
in Greece. The Bushmen (Bleek) have the same opinion. The 
Satapatlta-Brahmana (Sacred Books of the East, xii. 284) shows 
how Prajapati, in his incestuous love, turned himself into a roe- 
buck, his daughter into a doe, and how both became constellations. 
This is a thoroughly good example of the savage myths (as in Peru, 
according to Acosta) by which beasts and anthropomorphic gods 
and stars are all jumbled together.' The Rig Veda contains 
examples of the idea that the good become stars. 

Solar and Lunar Myths. — These are universally found, and are 
too numerous to be examined here. The sun and moon, as in the 
Bulgarian ballad of the Sun's Bride (a mortal girl), are looked on 
as living beings. In Mexico they were two men, or gods of a human 
character who were burned. The Eskimo know the moon as a 
man who visits earth, and, again, as a girl who had her face spotted 
by ashes which the Sun threw at her. The Khasias make the sun 
a woman, who daubs the face of the moon, a man. The Homeric 
hymn to Helios, as Max Muller observes, " looks on the sun as a 
half-god, almost a hero, who had once lived on earth." This is 
precisely the Bushman view; the sun was a man who irradiated 
light from his armpit. In New Zealand and in North America 
the sun is a beast, whom adventurers have trapped and beaten. 
Medicine has been made with his blood. In the Andaman Islands 
the Sun is the wife of the Moon (Jour, of A nth. Soc, 1882). Among 
aboriginal tribes in India (Dal ton, p. 186) the Moon is the "Sun's 
bride; she was faithless and he cut her in two, but occasionally 
lets her shine in full beauty. The Andaman Islanders account for 
the white brilliance of the moon by saying that he is daubing 
himself with white clay, a custom common in savage and Greek 
mysteries. The Red Men accounted to the Jesuits for the spherical 
forms of sun and moon by saying that their appearance was caused 
by their bended bows. The Moon in Greek myths loved Endymion, 
and was bribed to be the mistress of Pan by the present of a 
fleece, like the Dawn in Australia, whose unchastity was rewarded 
by a gift of a red cloak of opossum skin. Solar and lunar myths 
usually account for the observed phenomena of eclipse, waning 
and waxing, sunset, spots on the moon, and so forth by various 
mythical adventures of the animated heavenly beings. In modern 
folk-lore the moon is a place to which bad peopleare sent, rather 
than a woman or a man. The mark of the hare in the moon has 
struck the imagination of Germans, Mexicans, Hottentots, Sinhalese, 
and produced myths among all these races. 4 

Myths of Death. — Few savage races regard death as a natural 
event. All natural deaths are supernatural with them. Men are 
assumed to be naturally immortal, hence a series of myths to 
account for the origin of death. Usually some custom or " taboo " 
is represented as having been broken, when death has followed. 
In New Zealand, Maui was not properly baptized. In Australia, 
a woman was told not to go near a certain tree where a bat lived; 
she infringed the prohibition, the bat fluttered out, and men died. 
The Ningphoos were dismissed^ from Paradise and became mortal, 
because one of them bathed in water which had been tabooed 
(Dalton, p. 13). In the Atharva Veda y Yama, like Maui in New 
Zealand, first " spied out the path to the other world," which all 
men after him have taken. In the Rig Veda (x. id), Yama " sought 
out a road for many." In the Solomon Islands (Jour, Anth, Inst., 
Feb. 1881), " Koevari was the author of death, by resuming her 
cast-off skin." The same story is told in the Banks Islands. In 
the Greek myth (Hesiod, Works and Days, 90), men lived without 
" ill diseases that give death to men " till the cover was lifted 
from the forbidden box of Pandora. As to the myths of Hades, 
the place of the dead, they are far too many to be mentioned in 
detail. In almost all the gates of hell are guarded by fierce beasts, 
and in Ojibway, Finnish, Greek, Papuan and Japanese myths no 
mortal visitor may escape from Hades who has once tasted the 
food of the dead. 

Myths of m Fire-stealing. — Those current in North America (where 
an animal is commonly the thief) will be found in Bancroft, vol. iv. 
The Australian version, singularly like one Greek legend, is given 
by Brough Smyth. Stories of the theft of Prometheus are recorded 
by Hesiod, Aeschylus, and their commentators. Muir and Kuhn 
may be consulted for Vedic fire-stealing. 

Heroic and Romantic Myths. — In addition to myths which are 
clearly intended to explain facts of the universe, most nations have 
their heroic and romantic myths. Familiar examples are the 
stories of Perseus, Odysseus, Sigurd, the Indian epic stories, the 
adventures of Ilmarinen and Wainamoinen in the Kalewala, and 
so forth. To discuss these myths as far as they can be considered 
apart from divine and explanatory tales would demand more space 
than we have at our disposal. It will become evident to any 
student of the romantic myths that they consist of different arrange- 

	1 See also Vishnu Purana, i. 131. 

	4 See Cornhill Magazine, " How the Stars got their Names " 
	(1882, p. 35), and " Some Solar and Lunar Myths " (1882, p. 440); 
	Max Muller, Selected Essays, i. 609-611. 

ments of a rather limited set of incidents. These incidents have 
been roughly classified by Von Hahn. 1 We may modify his arrange- 
ment as follows. 

There is (i) the story of a bride or bridegroom who transgresses 
a commandment of a mystic nature, and disappears as a result of 
the sin. The bride sins as in Eros and Psyche, Freja and Oddur, 
Pururavas and Urvasi. 2 The sin of Urvasi and Psyche was seeing 
their husbands — naked in the latter case. The sin was against 
" the manner of women." Now therule of etiquette which forbids 
seeing or naming the husband (especially the latter) is of the widest 
distribution. The offence in the Welsh form of the story is naming 
the partner — a thing forbidden among early Greeks and modern 
Zulus. Presumably the tale (with its example of the sanction) sur- 
vives the rule in many cases. (2) " Penelope formula." The man 
leaves the wife and returns after many years. A good example 
occurs in Chinese legend. (3) Formula of the attempt to avoid 
fate or the prophecy of an oracle. This incident takes numerous 
shapes, as in the story of the fatal birth of Perseus, Paris, the 
Egyptian prince shut up in a tower, the birth of Oedipus. (4) 
Slaughter of a monster. This is best known in the case of Andro- 
meda and Perseus. (5) Flight, by aid of an animal usually, from 
cannibalism, human sacrifice, or incest. The Greek example is 
Phrixus, Helle, and the ram of the golden fleece. (6) Flight of a 
lady and her lover from a giant father or wizard father. Jason 
and Medea furnish the Greek example. (7) The youngest brother 
the successful adventurer, and the head of the family. We have 
seen the example of Greek mythic illustrations of " Jiingsten- 
recht," or supremacy of the youngest, in the Hesiodic myth of 
Zeus, the youngest child of Cronus. (8) Bride given to whoever 
will accomplish difficult adventures or vanquish girl in race. The 
custom of giving a bride without demanding bride-price, in reward 
for a great exploit, is several times alluded to in the Iliad, In 
Greek heroic myth Jason thus wins Medea, and (in the race) Milanion 
wins Atalanta. In the Kalewala much of the Jason cycle, including 
this part, recurs. The rider through the fire wins Brunhild but 
this may belong to another cycle of ideas. (9) The grateful beasts, 
who, having been aided by the hero, aid him in his adventures. 
Melampus and the snakes is a Greek example. This story is but 
one specimen of the personal human character of animals in myths, 
already referred to the intellectual condition of savages. (10) 
Story of the strong man and his adventures, and stories of the 
comrades Keen-eye, Quick-ear, and the rest. Jason has comrades 
like these, as had Ilmarinen and Heracles, the Greek " strong man." 
(11) Adventure with an ogre, who is blinded and deceived by a 
pun of the hero's. Odysseus and Polyphemus is the Greek ex- 
ample. (12) Descent into Hades of the hero. Heracles, Odysseus, 
Wainamoinen in the Kalewala, are the best-known examples in 
epic literature. These are twelve specimens of the incidents, to 
which we may add (13) " the false bride," as in the poem of Berte 
aux grans Pits, and (1^) the legend of the bride said to produce 
beast-children. The belief in the latter phenomenon is very common 
in Africa, and in the Arabian Nigkts t 2inh we have seen it in America. 

Of these formulae (chosen because illustrated by Greek heroic 
legends) — (1) is a sanction of barbarous nuptial etiquette; (2) is an 
obvious ordinary incident; (3) is moral, and both (3) and (1) may 
pair off with all the myths of the origin of death from the infringe- 
ment of a taboo or sacred command; (^) would naturally occur 
wherever, as on the West Coast of Africa, human victims have 
been offered to sharks or other beasts; (5) the storyof flight from 
a horrible crime, occurs in some stellar myths, and is an easy and 
natural invention; (6) flight from wizard father or husband, is 
found in Bushman and Namaqua myth, where the husband is an 
elephant; (7) success of youngest brother, may have been an ex- 
planation and sanction of " Jiingsten-recht " — Maui in New Zealand 
is an example, and Herodotus found the story among the Scythians; 
(8) the bride given to successful adventurer, is consonant with 
heroic manners as late as Homer; (9) is no less consonant with the 
belief that beasts have human sentiments and supernatural powers; 
(10) the " strong man," is found among Eskimo and Zulus, and was 
an obvious invention when strength was the most admired of 
qualities; (11) the baffled ogre, is found among Basques and Irish, 
and turns on a form of punning which inspires an " ananzi " story 
in West Africa; (12) descent into Hades, is the natural result of 
the savage conception of Hades, and the tale is told of actual living 
people in the Solomon Islands and in New Caledonia ; Eskimo 
Angekoks can and do descend into Hades — it is the prerogative of 
the necromantic magician; (13) "the false bride/' found among 
the Zulus, does not permit of such easy explanation — naturally, 
in Zululand, the false bride is an animal; (14) the bride accused of 
bearing beast -children, has already been disposed of; the belief is 
inevitable where no distinction worth mentioning is taken between 
men and animals. English folk-lore has its woman who bore 
rabbits. 

The formulae here summarized, with others, are familiar in the 
marchen of Samoyeds, Zulus, Bushmen, Hottentots and Red 
Indians. For an argument intended to show that Greek heroic 

	-'■'- — ■ M — ■ 

	1 Grieckische und albanesische M&rcken, i. 45. 
	'Tenth Book of Rig Veda and " Brahmana " of Yajur-Veda; 
	Muller, Selected Essays, i. 410. 

myths may be adorned and classified marchen, in themselves 
survivals of savage fancy, see Fortnightly Review, May 1872, " Myths 
and Fairy Tales." The old explanation was that marchen are 
degenerate heroic myths. This does not explain the marchen of 
African, and perhaps not of Siberian races. 

In this sketch of mythology that of Rome is not included, because 
its most picturesque parts are borrowed from or adapted into 
harmony^ with the mythology of Greece. Greece, India and Scandi- 
navia will supply a fair example of Aryan mythology (without 
entering on the difficult Slavonic and Celtic fields). (A. L,) 


MYXOEDEMA (or athyrea), the medical term for a constitu- 
tional disease (see Metabolic Diseases) due to the degeneration 
of the thyroid gland, and occurring in adults; it may be con- 
trasted with cretinism, which is a condition appearing in early 
childhood. There are two forms, myxoedema proper and opera- 
tive myxoedema {cachexia slrumipriva) . (1) Myxoedema has 
been termed "Gull's Disease" from Sir William Gull's observa- 
tions in 1873. Women are more often the victims than men, in 
a ratio of 6 to 1 . It frequently affects members of the same 
family and may be transmitted through the mother, and it has 
been observed sometimes to follow exophthalmic goitre. • The 
symptoms are a marked increase in hulk and weight of the body, 
puffy appearance of skin which does not pit on pressure, the line 
of the features becoming obliterated and getting coarse and 
broad, the lips thick and nostrils enlarged, with loss of hair, 
subnormal temperature and marked mental changes. There is 
striking slowness of thought and action, the memory becomes 
defective, and the patient becomes irritable and suspicious. 
In some instances the condition progresses to that of dementia. 
The thyroid gland itself is diminished in size, and may become 
completely atrophied and converted into a fibrous mass. The 
untreated disease is progressive, but the course is slow and the 
symptoms may extend over 12 to 15 years, death from asthenia 
or tuberculosis being the most frequent ending. (2) Symptoms 
similar to the above may follow complete removal of the thyroid 
gland. Kocher of Bern found that, in the total removal of the 
gland by operation, out of 408 cases operative myxoedema 
occurred in 60, but it is thought that if a small portion of the 
gland is left, or if accessory glands are present, these symptoms 
will not develop. The treatment of myxoedema is similar to 
that of cretinism. 


MYZOSTOMIDA, a remarkahle group of small parasitic 
worms which live on crinoid echinoderms; they were first dis- 
covered by Leuckart in 1827. Some species, such as Myzosloma 
cirriferum, move about on the host; others, such as M. glabrum, 
remain stationary with the pharynx inserted in the mouth of the 
crinoid. M, deformator gives rise to a " gall " on the arm of the 
host, one joint of the pinnule growing round the worm so as to 
enclose it in a cyst (see fig. E) ; whilst M. pulvinar lives actually 
in the alimentary canal of a species of Anledon. 

A typical myzostomid (see A, B, C) is of a flattened t rounded 
shape, with a thin edge drawn out into delicate radiating cirri. 
The skin is ciliated. The dorsal surface is smooth; ventrally there 
are five pairs of parapodia, armed with supporting and hooked 
setae, by means 01 which the worm adheres to its Host. Beyond 
the parapodia are four pairs of organs, often called suckers, but 
probably of sensory nature, and comparable to the lateral sense 
organs of Capitellids (Wheeler). The mouth and cloacal aperture 
are generally at opposite ends of the ventral surface. The former 
leads to a protrusible pharynx (B), from which the oesophagus 
opens into a wide intestinal chamber with branching lateral diver- 
ticula. There appears to be no vascular system. The nervous 
system consists of a circumoesophageal nerve, with scarcely differ- 
entiated brain, joining below a large ganglionic mass no doubt 
representing many fused ganglia (B). The dorsoventral and. the 
parapodial muscles are much developed, whilst the coelom is re- 
duced mostly to branched spaces in which the genital produces 
ripen. Full-grown myzostomids are hermaphrodite. The^ male 
organ (C) consists of a branched sac opening to the exterior on 
each side. The paired ovaries discharge their products into a 
median coelemic chamber with lateral branches (C), olten called 
the uterus, from which the ripe ova are discharged by a median 
dorsal pore into the terminal region of the rectum (cloaca). Into 
this same cloacal chamber open ventrally a pair of ciliated tubes 
communicating by funnels with the coelom (Nansen and Wheeler) ; 
these are possibly nephridia, and excretory in function. 

The Myzostomida are protandric hermaphrodites, being 
functional males when small, nermaphrodite later, and finally 
functional females (Wheeler). Small "males" are in some 
species constantly associated with large hermaphrodites, but 
according to Beard there are in some cases true dwarf males, 
comparable to the complementary males described by Darwin 
in the Cirripedia. The embryology of Myzostoma has been 

	A, Ventral view of Myzostoma. 
	B, Diagram of Myzostoma, show- 
	ing the nervous and alimen- 
	tary systems. 
	C, Diagram of Myzostoma, show- 
	ing the genital organs {from 
	v. Graff and Wheeler)* 
	a, Cloacal aperture. 
	at. Arm. 
	c t Cirrus. 
	c/, " Cloaca." 
	coe, Coelom. 
	ctj Swollen pinnule forming a 
	eyst.^ 
	*, Intestine and its caeca. 
	Is, Larval setae. 
	«, Mouth. 
	D, Larva of Myzostoma gtabrum. 
	(After Beard.) 
	E, Portion of the arm of Penta- 
	crinus, showing a cyst 
	containing Myzostoma. 
	n, Ciliated tube (nephridium?). 
	0, Opening. 
	ov t Ovary. 
	/>, Parapodium. 
	pn, Pharynx. 
	s t Sense organ. 
	sp t Sperm-sac. 
	vn t Ventral ganglionic mass. 
	cf , Male opening. 
	9 , Female opening. 

studied by Metchnikoff and Beard. Cleavage leads to the 
formation of an epibolic gastrula and ciliated embryo which 
hatches as a free-swimming larva remarkably like that of a 
Polychaete worm (D). The larva is provided with postoral 
and perianal ciliated bands, and on either side with a bunch of 
long provisional setae. The mesoderm becomes segmented, 
and the parapodia subsequently develop from before backwards; 
but almost all internal traces of segmentation are lost in the 
adult. The structure and development of the Myzostomida 
seem to show that they are nearly related to Polychaeta (see 
Chaetopoda), though highly modified in relation to their 
parasitic mode of life. 

Authorities. — L. v. Graff, Das Genus Myzostoma (Leipzig, 
1877); and " The Myzostomida/* Challenger Reports (1884), vol. x.; 
E. MetehnikofT, Zeit. Wiss. Zool. (1866), vols, v., xvi.; J. Beard, 
Mitth. Z. St Neapel (1884), vol. v.; W. M. Wheeler, ibid. (1896), 
vol. xii. (E. S. G.) 


MZABITES, or Beni-Mzab, a .confederation of Berber tribes, 
now under the direct authority of France. Of all the Berber 
peoples the Mzabites have remained freest from foreign admix- 
ture. Their own country is a region of the Algerian Sahara, 
about 100 m. south of El-Aghuat. It consists of five oases close 
together, viz. Ghardaia, Beni-Isguen, El-Ateuf, Melika and 
Bu Nura, and two isolated oases farther north, Berrian and 
Guerrara. The total population numbered at the 1906 census 
45,996, of whom about 100 were Europeans and a very small 
proportion Arabs and Jews. The Mzabites are of small and 
slender figure, with very short necks and under-developed legs. 
Their faces are flat, with short nose, thick lips and very deep-set 
eyes, and their complexion pale. Their dress is a shirt of thick 
wool, usually many-coloured. They are agriculturists, and are 
also famed as traders. The butchers, fruiterers, bath-house 
keepers, road-sweepers and carriers of the African littoral from 
Tangier to. Tripoli are nearly all Mzabites. Their industries, too, 
are highly organized. The Mzabite burnouses and carpets are 
found throughout North Africa. Their commercial honesty is 
proverbial. Nearly all read and write Arabic, though in talking 
among themselves they use the Zenata dialect of the Berber 
language, for which, in common with other Berber peoples, 
they have no written form surviving. They are Mahomme- 
dans, of the Ibadite sect, and are regarded as heretics by the 
Sunnites. 

According to tradition the Ibadites, after their overthrow at 
Tiaret by the Fatimites, took refuge during the 10th century 
in the country to the south-west of Wargla, where they founded 
an independent state. In 1012, owing to further persecutions, 
they fled to their present quarters, where they long remained 
invulnerable. After the capture of El-Aghuat by the French, 
the Mzabites concluded with the Algerian government, in 1853, 
a convention by which they engaged to pay an annual con- 
tribution of £1800 in return for their independence. In Novem- 
ber 1882 the Mzab country was definitely annexed to Algeria. 
Ghardaia (pop. 7868) is the capital of the confederation, and 
next in importance is Beni-Isguen (4916), the chief commercial 
centre. Since the establishment of French control, Beni-Isguen 
has become the d£p6t for the sale of European goods. French 
engineers have rendered the oases much more fertile than they 
used to be by a system of irrigation works. (See also Algeria.) 

See A. Coyne, Le Mzab (Algiers, 1879); Rinn, Occupation du 
Mzab (Algiers, 1885); Amat, Le M*Zab et les M'Zabites (Paris, 
1888). Also Algeria and Berbers. 

N, A letter which regularly follows M in the alphabet, and, 
like it in its early forms has the first limb longer than 
the others; thus, written from right to left, V\. The 
Semitic languages gradually diminish the size of the 
other two limbs, while the Greek and Latin alphabets tend to 
make all three of equal length. The earliest name of the symbol 
was Nutty whence comes the Greek ny (vv). The sound of n 
varies according to the point at which the contact of the tongue 
with the roof of the mouth is made; it may be dental, alveolar, 
palatal or guttural. In Sanskrit these four sounds are dis- 
tinguished by different symbols; the last two occur in com- 
bination with stops or affricates of the same series. The French 
or German n when standing by itself is dental, the English 
alveolar, i.e. pronounced like the English t and d against the 
sockets of the teeth instead of the teeth themselves. The guttural 
nasal is written in English ng as in ring; for# the palatal n as 
in lynch there is no separate symbol. The sound of n stands in the 
same relation to d as m stands to b; both are ordinarily voiced 
and the mouth position for both is the same, but in pronouncing 
n the nasal passage is left open, so that the sound of n can be 
continued while that of d cannot. This is best observed by 
pronouncing syllables where the consonant comes last as in and 
id. When the nasal passage is closed, as when one has a bad cold, 
m and n cannot be pronounced; attempts to pronounce moon 
result only in hood. Two important points arise in connexion 
with nasals: (1) sonant nasals, (2) nasalization of vowels. The 
discovery of sonant nasals by Dr Karl Brugman in 1876 (Curtius, 
Studien, 9, pp. 285-338) explained many facts of language which 
had been hitherto obscure and elucidated many difficulties in 
the Indo-European vowel system. It had been observed, for ex- 
ample, that the same original negative prefix was represented in 
Sanskrit by a, Greek by a, in Latin by in and in Germanic by «w, 
and these differences had not been accounted for satisfactorily. 
Dr Brugman argued that in these and similar cases the syllable 
was made by the consonant alone, and the nasal so used was 
termed a sonant nasal and written n. In most cases Sanskrit 
and Greek lost the nasal sound altogether and replaced it by a 
vowel a, a, while in Latin and Germanic a vowel was developed 
independently before the nasal. In the accusative singular of 
consonant stems Sans, padam, Gr. ir65a, Lat. pedem, Sanskrit 
and Greek did not, as generally, agree, but it was shown that 
in such cases there were originally two forms according to the 
nature of the sound beginning the next word in the sentence. 
Thus an original Indo-European *pedm } would not be treated 
precisely in the same way if the next word began with a vowel 
as it would when a consonant followed. Sanskrit had adopted 
the form used before vowels, Greek the form before consonants 
and each had dropped the alternative form. The second point — 
the nasalizing of vowels — is difficult for an Englishman to under- 
stand or to produce, as the sounds do not exist in his language. 
Thus in learning to pronounce French he tends to replace the 
nasalized vowels by the nearest sounds in English, making 
the Fr. on a nasalized vowel (0), into Eng. ong, a vowel 
followed by a guttural consonant. The nasalized vowels are 
produced by drawing forward the uvula, the " tab " at the end 
of the soft palate, so that the breath escapes through the nose as 
well as the mouth. In the French nasalized vowels, however, 
many phoneticians hold that, besides the leaving of the nasal 
passage open, there is a change in the position of the tongue in 
passing from a to a. The nasalized vowels are generally written 
with a hook below, upon the analogy of the transliteration of 
such sounds in the Slavonic languages, but as the same symbol is 
often used to distinguish an " open " vowel from a " close " one, 
the use is not without ambiguity. On the other hand, it is not 
admissible to write a for the nasalized vowel in languages which 
have accent signs, e.g. Lithuanian. It is possible to nasalize 
some consonants as well as vowels; nasalized spirants play an 
important part in the so-called " Yankee " pronunciation of 
Americans. (P. Gi.) 


NAAS (pron. Nace, as in place), a market town of Co. 
Kildare, Ireland, 20 m, S.W. from Dublin on branches of the 
Great Southern and Western railway and of the Grand Canal. 
Pop. (1901) 3836. It is situated among the foothills of the 
Wicklow Mountains, close to the river Liffey. The town is of 
great antiquity, and was a residence of the kings of Leinster, the 
place of whose assemblies is marked by a neighbouring rath or 
mound. Naas returned two members to the Irish parliament 
from 1559 until the union in 1800. Of a castle taken by Cromwell 
in 1650, and of several former abbeys, there are no remains. 
Punchestown racecourse, 2\ m. S.E., is the scene of well-known 
steeplechases. 


NABATAEANS, a people of ancient Arabia, whose settlements 
in the time of Josephus (AnL i. 12. 4; comp. Jerome, Quaest. 
in Gen. xxv.) gave the name of Nabatene to the border-land 
between Syria and Arabia from the Euphrates to the Red Sea. 
Josephus suggests, and Jerome, apparently following him, 
affirms, that the name is identical with that of the Ishmaelite 
tribe of Nebaioth (Gen. xxv. 13; Isa. lx. 7), which in later Old 
Testament times had a leading place among the northern Arabs, 
and is associated with Kedar (Isa. lx. 7) much as Pliny v. n (12) 
associates Nabataei and Cedrei. The identification is rendered 
uncertain by the fact that the name Nabataean is properly 
spelled with t not t (on the inscriptions, cf. also Arabic Nabotj 
NabUy &c.) . Thus the history of the Nabataeans cannot certainly 
be carried back beyond 312 B.C., at which date they were attacked 
without success by Antigonus I. Cyclops in their mountain 
fortress of Petra. They are described by Diodorus (xix. 94 seq.) 
as being at this time a strong tribe of some 10,000 warriors, 
pre-eminent among the nomadic Arabs, eschewing agriculture, 
fixed houses and the use of wine, but adding to pastoral pursuits 
a profitable trade with the seaports in myrrh and spices from 
Arabia Felix, as well as a trade with Egypt in bitumen from 
the Dead Sea. Their arid country was the best safeguard of their 
cherished liberty; for the bottle-shaped cisterns for rain-water 
which they excavated in the rocky or argillaceous soil were 
carefully concealed from invaders. Petra (q.v.) or Sela* was the 
ancient capital of Edom; the Nabataeans must have occupied 
the old Edomite country, and succeeded to its commerce, after 
the Edomites took advantage of the Babylonian captivity to 
press forward into southern Judaea. 1 This migration, the date 
of which cannot be determined, also made them masters of the 
shores of the Gulf of *Akaba and the important harbour of 
Elath. Here, according to Agatharchides (Geog. Gr. Min. t i. 
178), they were for a time very troublesome, as wreckers 
and pirates, to the reopened commerce between Egypt and 
the East, till they were chastised by the Greek sovereigns of 
Alexandria. 

The Nabataeans had already some tincture of foreign culture 
when they first appear in history. That culture was naturally 
Aramaic; they wrote a letter to Antigonus " in Syriac letters," 
and Aramaic continued to be the language of their coins and 
inscriptions when the tribe grew into a kingdom, and profited 
by the decay of the Seleucids to extend its borders northward 
over the more fertile country east of the Jordan. They occupied 
IJauran, and about 85 B.C. their king Aretas (JJaritha) 
became lord of Damascus and Coele-Syria. Allies of the first 
Hasmonaeans in their struggles against the Greeks (1 Mace, 
v. 25, ix. 35; 2 Mace. v. 8), they became the rivals of the Judaean 
dynasty in the period of its splendour, and a chief element in 
the disorders which invited Pompey's intervention in Palestine. 
The Roman arms were not very successful, and King Aretas 
retained his whole possessions, including Damascus, as a Roman 

	1 See Edom, and (for the view that Mai. i. 1-5, refers to the 
	expulsion of Edomites from their land) Malachi. 

vassal. 1 As " allies " of the Romans the Nabataeans continued to 
flourish throughout the first Christian century. Their power 
extended far into Arabia, particularly along the Red Sea; and 
Petra was a meeting-place of many nations, though its commerce 
was diminished by the rise of the Eastern trade-route from 
Myoshormus to Coptos on the Nile. Under the Roman peace 
they lost their warlike and nomadic habits, and were a sober, 
acquisitive, orderly people, wholly intent on trade and agri- 
culture (Strabo xvi. 4). They might have long been a bulwark 
between Rome and the wild hordes of the desert but for the^short- 
sighted cupidity of Trajan, who reduced Petra and broke up the 
Nabataean nationality (105 a.d.). The new Arab invaders who 
soon pressed forward into their seats found the remnants of the 
Nabataeans transformed into felldhin, and speaking Aramaic 
like their neighbours. Hence Nabataeans became the Arabic 
name for Aramaeans, whether in Syria or Irak, a fact which has 
been incorrectly held to prove that the Nabataeans were origin- 
ally Aramaean immigrants from Babylonia. It is now known, 
however, that they were true Arabs — as the proper names on their 
inscriptions show — who had come under Aramaic influence. 

See especially on this last point (against Quatremere, Journ. 
asiat. xv. , vol. ii., 1835), Noldeke in Zeit. d. morgentdnd. GeselL 
xvii. 705 seq M xxv. 122 seq. The so-called " Nabataean Agriculture " 
(Faldha Nabafiya), which professes to be an Arabic translation by 
Ibn Wahshiya from an ancient Nabataean source, is a forgery of 
the 10th century (see A. von Gutschmid, Z. d, mordent. Ges. xv. 
1 seq.; Noldeke, ib. xxix. 445 seq.). Complete bibliographical 
information is given by E. Schiirer in his sketch of Nabataean 
history appended to Gesch. d. Jiid. Volkes (1901, vol. i.; cf. Eng. 
edition, 1890, i. 2, pp. 345 sqq.); to this may be added the article 
by H. Vincent, Rev, oibl, vii. 567 sqq., and, for more general informa- 
tion, R. Dussaud, Les Arabes en Syrie (1907). For early external 
evidence see H. Winckler, Keil, u. Alte Test. 1 p. 151 seq.; M. Streck, 
Mitteil. d. vorderasiat. GeselL (1906). pt. iii., and Ktio, 1006, p. 206 seq. 
The Nabataean inscriptions (see Semitic Languages) are collected 
in the Corpus Inscr. Semiticarum of the French Academy, pt. ii.; 
see also the Academy's RSpertoire d'ipigr. sSm.; and the discussions, 
&c, in the writings of Clermont-Ganneau [Rec. d'archiol. Orient.) 
and M. Lidzbarski (Handbuch d. nord-semtt. Epif>.; Ephemeris f. 
sent. Epig.). For English readers the selection in G. A. Cooke, 
North-Semitic Inscriptions (Oxford, 1903) is the most useful. 

(W. R. S.;S.A. C.) 


NABBES, THOMAS (b. 1605), English dramatist, was born in 
humble circumstances in Worcestershire. He entered Exeter 
College, Oxford, in 1621, but left the university without taking a 
degree, and about 1630 began a career in London as a dramatist. 
His works include: Covent Garden (acted 1633, printed 1638), 
a prose comedy of small merit; Tottenham Court (acted 1634, 
printed 1638), a comedy the scene of which is laid in a holiday 
resort of the London tradesmen; Hannibal and Scipio (acted 
1635, printed 1637), a historical tragedy; The Bride (1638), a 
comedy; The Unfortunate Mother (1640), an unacted tragedy; 
Microcosmus, a Morall Maske (printed 1637) ; two other masques, 
Spring's Glory and Presentation intended for the Prince his 
Highnesse on his Birthday (printed together in 1638); and a 
continuation of Richard Knolles's Generall Historie of the Turkes 
(1638). His verse is smooth and musical, and if his language 
is sometimes coarse, his general attitude is moral. The masque 
of Microcosmus — really a morab'ty play, in which Physander 
after much error is reunited to his wife Bellanima, who personifies 
the soul — is admirable in its own kind, and the other two masques, 
slighter in construction but ingenious, show Nabbes at his best. 

Nabbes's plays were collected in 1639; and Microcosmus was 
printed in Dodsley's Old Plays (1744). All his works, with the 
exception of his continuation of Knolles's history, were reprinted 
by A. H. Bullen in his Old English Plays (second series, 1887). 
See also F. G. Fleay, Biog. Chron. of the English Drama (1891). 


NABHA, a native state of India, within the Punjab. Area, 
966 sq. m. Pop. (1901) 297,949. Its territories are scattered; 
one section, divided into twelve separate tracts, lies among the 
territories of Patiala and Jind, in the east and south of the 
Punjab; the other section is in the extreme south-east. The 
whole of the territories belong physically to a plain; but they 
vary in character from the great fertility of the Pawadh region 
to the aridity of the Rajputana desert. Nabha is one of the Sikh 

	1 Compare 2 Cor. xi. 32. The Nabataean Aretas or Aeneas there 
	mentioned reigned from 9 B.C. to a.d. 40. 

states, founded by a member of the Phulkian family, which estab- 
lished its independence about 1763. The first relations of the 
state with the British were in 1 807-1808, when the raja obtained 
protection against the threatened encroachments of Ranjit 
Singh. During the Mutiny in 1857 the raja showed distinguished 
loyalty, and was rewarded by grants of territory to the value of 
over £10,000. The imperial service troops of the raja Hira 
Singh (b. c. 1843; succeeded m l8 7 T ) did good service during the 
Tirah campaign of 1897-98. The chief products of the state are 
wheat, millets, pulses, cotton and sugar. The estimated gross 
revenue is £100,000;' no tribute is paid. The territory is crossed 
by the main line and also by several branches of the North- 
western railway, and is irrigated by the Sirhind canal. 

The town of Nabha, founded in 1755, has a station on the 
Rajpura-Bhatinda branch of the North-Western railway. Pop. 
(1901) 18,468. 

See Phulkian States Gazetteer (Lahore, 1909). 


NABIGHA DHUBYANl [Ziyad ibn Mu'awlyya] (6th and 7th 
centuries), Arabian poet, was one of the last poets of pre-Islamic 
times. His tribe, the Bani Dhubyan, belonged to the district near 
Mecca, but he himself spent most of his time at the courts of 
Hira and Ghassan. In Hira he remained under Mondhir (Mund- 
hir) III., and under his successor in 562. After a sojourn at the 
court of Ghassan, he returned to Hira under Nu'man. He was, 
however, compelled to flee to Ghassan, owing to some verses 
he had written on the queen, but returned again about 600. 
When Nu*man died some five years later he withdrew to his own 
tribe. The date of his death is uncertain, but he does not seem 
to have known Islam. His poems consist largely of eulogies and 
satires, and are concerned with the strife of Hira and Ghassan, 
and of the Bani Abs and the Bani Dhubyan. He is one of the 
six eminent pre-Islamic poets whose poems were collected before 
the middle of the 2nd century of Islam, and have been regarded 
as the standard of Arabian poetry. Some writers consider him 
the first of the six. 

His poems have been edited by W. Ahlwardt in the Diwans of the 
six ancient Arabic Poets (London, 1870), and separately by H. 
Derenbourg (Paris, 1869, a reprint from the Journal asiatique for 
1868). (G.W.T.) 


NABOB, a corruption of the Hindostani nawab, originally used 
for native rulers. In the 18th century, when Clive's victories 
made Indian terms familiar in England, it began to be applied 
to Anglo-Indians who returned with fortunes from the East. 


NABUA, a town in the extreme S. of the province of Ambos 
Camarines, Luzon, Philippine Islands, on the Bicol river, about 
22 m. S.S.E. of Nueva Caceres, the capital. Pop. (1903) 18,893. 
Nabua is in the district known as La Rinconada — a name 
originally given to it on account of its inaccessibility. It is 
connected by road, railway and the Bicol river (navigable for 
light-draft boats) with Nueva Caceres. Nabua is the centre of 
an agricultural region, which produces much rice and some 
Indian corn, sugar and pepper. The language is Bicol. 


NACAIRE, Naker, Naquaire (Arab, naqara), the medieval 
name for the kettledrum, the earliest representation of which 
appears in the unique MS. kuown as the Vienna Genesis (5th or 
6th century). The nacaire was, according to Froissart, among the 
instruments used at the triumphal entry of Edward III. into 
Calais. The Chronicles of Joinville describe the instrument as 
a kind of drum: " Lor il fist sonner les tabours que Y on appelle 
nacaires." Chaucer, in his description of the tournament in the 
Knight's Tale, line 1653, also refers to this early kettledrum. 


NACHMANIDES (Na^manides), the usual name of Moses 
ben Nahman (known also as Ramban), Jewish scholar, was born 
in Gerona in 1194 and died in Palestine c. 1270. His chief work, 
the Commentary on the Pentateuch, is distinguished by originality 
and charm. The author was a mystic as well as a philologist, 
and his works unite with peculiar harmony the qualities of reason 
and feeling. He was also a Talmudist of high repute, and wrote 
glosses on various Tractates, Responsa and other legal works. 
Though not a philosopher, he was drawn into the controversy 
that arose over the scholastic method of Maimonides (q.v.). 
He endeavoured to steer a middle course between the worshippers 
and the excommunicators of Maimonides, but he did not succeed 
in healing the breach. His homiletic books, Epistle on Sanctity 
{Iggereth ha-qodesh) and Law of Man (Torath ha- Adam), which 
deal respectively with the sanctity of marriage and the solemnity 
of death, are full of intense spirituality, while at the same time 
treating of ritual customs — a combination which shows essential 
Rabbinism at its best. He occupies an important position in the 
history of the acceptance by medieval Jews of the Kabbala 
(q.v.); for, though he made no fresh contributions to the philo- 
sophy of mysticism, the fact that this famous rabbi was himself 
a mystic induced a favourable attitude in many who would other- 
wise have rejected mysticism as Maimonides did. In 1263 
Nahmanides was forced to enter into a public disputation with 
a Jewish-Christian, Pablo Christiani, in the presence of King 
James of Aragon. Though Nachmanides was assured that 
perfect freedom of speech was conceded to him, his defence was 
pronounced blasphemous and he was banished for life. In 1267 
he went to Palestine and settled at Acre. He died about 1270. 
See S. Schechter, Studies in Judaism, first series, pp. 120 seq.; 
Graetz, History of the Jews (English translation vol. iii. ch. xvi. 
and xvii.). (I. A.) 


NACHOD, a town of Bohemia, Austria, 109 m. E.N.E. of 
Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 9899, mostly Czech. It is situated 
on the Mettau river, at the entrance of the Lewin-Nachod pass. 
The old castle contains a collection of historical paintings and 
archives, and there are several old churches, of which that of 
St Lawrence is mentioned as the parish church in 1350. The 
town originally gathered round the castle of Nachod, of which 
the first lord was a member of the powerful family of Hron, 
in the middle of the 13th century. It suffered much during the 
Hussite Wars, and in 1437 was captured by the celebrated robber 
knight Kolda of Zampach, and retaken by George of Podebrad 
in 1456 and included in his estates. It was sold in 1623, and in 
1634 given to Ottavio Piccolomini; finally, after many changes 
of ownership, the castle and titular lordship came in 1840 to 
the princes of Schaumburg-Lippe. The important engagements 
fought near the town on the 27th and 28th of June 1866 opened 
Bohemia to the victorious Prussians. 


NACHTIGAL, GUSTAV (1834-1885), German explorer in 
Central Africa, son of a Lutheran pastor, was born at Eichstedt 
in the Mark of Brandenburg, on the 23rd of February 1834. 
After medical study at the universities of Halle, Wiirzburg 
and Greifswald, he practised for a few years as a military 
surgeon. Finding the climate of his native country injurious 
to his health, he went to Algiers and Tunis, and took part, as a 
surgeon, in several expeditions into the interior. Commissioned 
by the king of Prussia to carry gifts to the sultan of Bornu in 
acknowledgment of kindness shown to German travellers, he 
set out in 1869 from Tripoli, and succeeded after two years' 
journeyings in accomplishing his mission. During this period 
he visited Tibesti and Borku, regions of the central Sahara 
not previously known to Europeans. From Bornu he went 
to Bagirmi, and, proceeding by way of Wadai and Kordofan, 
emerged from darkest Africa, after having been given up for 
lost, at Khartum in the winter of 1874. His journey, graphically 
described in his Sahara und Sudan (3 vols., 1870-1889), placed 
the intrepid explorer in the front rank of discoverers. On the 
establishment of a protectorate over Tunisia by France, Nachtigal 
was sent thither as consul-general for the German empire, and 
remained there until 18S4, when he was despatched by Prince 
Bismarck to West Africa as special commissioner, ostensibly 
to inquire into the condition of German commerce, but really 
to annex territories to the German flag. As the result of his 
mission Togoland and Cameroon were added to the German 
empire. On his return voyage he died at sea off Cape Palmas 
on the 20th of April 1885, and was buried at Grand Bassam. 

'NachtigaVs travels are summarized in Gttstav NachtigaVs Reisen 
in der Sahara und im Sudan, by Dr Albert Frankel (Leipzig, 1887). 
A French translation, by J. van Vollenhoven, of that part of his 
work concerning Wadai, appeared in the Bull, du comiti de VAfriq. 
franqaise for 1903 under tne title of (( Le Voyage de Nachtigal au 
Ouadai." Nachtigal died before transcribing his notes on Wadai, 
and they were edited in the German edition by E. Groddeck. 


NADASDY, TAMAS L, Count, called the great palatine 
(1498-1562), Hungarian statesman, was the son of Francis I. 
Nadasdy and was educated at Graz, Bologna and Rome. In 
1 521 he accompanied Cardinal Cajetan (whom the pope had sent 
to Hungary to preach a crusade against the Turks) to Buda as 
his interpreter. In 1525 he became a member of the council of 
state and was sent by King Louis II. to the diet of Spires to ask 
for help in the imminent Turkish war. During his absence the 
Mohacs catastrophe took place, and Nadasdy only returned 
to Hungary in time to escort the queen-widow from Komarom 
to Pressburg. He was sent to offer the Hungarian crown to 
the archduke Ferdinand, and on his coronation (Nov. 3rd, 1527) 
was made commandant of Buda. On the capture of Buda by 
Suleiman the Magnificent, Nadasdy went over to John Zapolya. 
In 1530 he successfully defended Buda against the imperialists. 
In 1533 his jealousy of the dominant influence of Ludovic 
Gritti caused him to desert John for Ferdinand, to whom he 
afterwards remained faithful. He was endowed with enormous 
estates by the emperor,* and from 1537 onwards became 
Ferdinand's secret but most influential counsellor. Subsequently, 
as ban of Croatia-Slavonia, he valiantly defended that border 
province against the Turks. He did his utmost to promote 
education, and the school which he founded at tJj-Sziget, where 
he also set up a printing-press, received a warm eulogy from 
Philip Melanchthon. In 1 540 Nadasdy was appointed grand- 
justiciar; in 1547 he presided over the diet of Nagyszombat, 
and finally,in 1559, was elected palatine by the diet of Pressburg. 
In his declining years he aided the heroic Mikl6s Zrinyi against 
the Turks. 

See Mindly Horvdth, The Life of Thomas Nddasdy (Hung.) (Buda, 
1838); T. Nadasdy, Family correspondence of Thomas Nddasdy 
(Hung.) (Budapest, 1882). " (R. N. B.) 


NADEN, CONSTANCE CAROLINE WOODHILL (1858-1889), 
English author, was born at Edgbaston, on the 24th of January 
1858, her father being an architect. Her mother died just after 
the child's birth, and Constance was brought up in the home of 
her grandfather. In 1881 she began to study physical science 
at Mason College, Birmingham. In 1881 she published Songs 
and Sonnets of Springtime; in 1887, A Modern Apostle, and other 
Poems. Her poems made such an impression on W. E. Gladstone 
that he included her, in an article in the Speaker, among the fore- 
most English poetesses of the day. After her grandfather's 
death Miss Naden found herself rich, and she travelled in the 
East and then (1888) settled in London. She died on the 23rd 
of December 1889. After 1876 she had paid increasing attention 
to philosophy, with her friend Dr Robert Lewins, and the two 
had formulated a system of their own, which they called " Hylo- 
Idealism." Her main ideas on the subject are contained in a 
posthumous volume of her essays (Induction and Deduction, 
1890), edited by Dr Lewins. 


NADIA, or Nuddea, a district of British India, in the 
Presidency division of Bengal. The administrative head- 
quarters are at Krishnagar. Area, 2793 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 
1,667,491. It is a district of great rivers. Standing at the head 
of the Gangetic delta, its alluvial surface, though still liable to 
periodical inundation, has been raised by ancient deposits of 
silt sufficiently high to be permanent dry land. Along the entire 
north-eastern boundary flows the main stream of the Ganges 
or Padma, of which all the remaining rivers of the district 
are offshoots. The Bhagirathi on the eastern border, and the 
Jalangi and the Matabhanga meandering through the centre 
of the district, are the chief of those offshoots, called distinctively 
the " Nadia rivers." But the whole surface of the country 
is interlaced with a network of minor streams, communicating 
with one another by side channels. All the rivers are navigable 
in the rainy season for boats of the largest burthen, but during 
the rest of the year they dwindle down to shallow streams, With 
dangerous sandbanks and bars. In former times the Nadia 
rivers afforded the regular means of communication between 
the upper valley of the Ganges and the seaboard; and much 
of the trade of the district still comes down to Calcutta by this 
route during the height of the rainy season. But the railways, 
with the main stream of the Ganges and the Sundarbans route, 
now carry by far the larger portion of the traffic. Rice is the 
staple crop; but the district is not as a whole fertile, the soil 
being sandy and the methods of cultivation backward. It is 
traversed by the main line and also by several branches of the 
Eastern Bengal railway. The battlefield of Plassey was situated 
in this district, but the floods of the Bhagirathi have washed 
away some part of it. 

Nadia or Nabadwip, an ancient capital of Bengal, was formerly 
situated on the east bank of the Bhagirathi, which has since 
changed its course. Pop. (1901) 10,880. It is celebrated for 
the sanctity and learning of its pundits, and as the birthplace 
of Chaitanya, the Vaishnav reformer of the 16th century. Its 
Sanskrit schools, called tols, are well known and of ancient 
foundation. 


NADIM [Abulfaraj Mahommed ibn Ishaq ibn abl Ya'qub 
un-Nadim] (d. 995), of Bagdad, the author of one of the most 
interesting works in Arabic literature, the Fihrist id- % Ulum 
(" list of the books of all nations that were to be found in Arabic ") 
with notices of the authors and other particulars, carried down 
to the year 988. A note In the Leiden MS. places the death of 
the author eight years later. Of his life we know nothing. His 
work gives us a complete picture of the most active intellectual 
period of the Arabian empire. He traces the rise and growth of 
philology and belles-lettres, of theology, orthodox and heretical, 
of law and history, of mathematics and astronomy, of medicine 
and alchemy; he does not despise the histories of knights errant, 
the fables of Kalila and Dimna, the facetiae of the " boon com- 
panions," the works of magic and divination. But to us no 
part of his work is more interesting than his account of the 
beliefs of sects and peoples beyond Islam. Here, fortunately, 
still more than in other parts of his work, he goes heyond the 
functions of the mere cataloguer; he tells what he learned of 
China from a Christian missionary of Nejran, of India from a de- 
scription of its religion compiled for the Barmecide Yahya; his full 
accounts of the Sabians of Harran and of the doctrines of Mani 
are of the first importance for the historian of Asiatic religions. 

Imperfect manuscripts of the Fihrist exist in Paris, Leiden and 
Vienna. The text was prepared for publication by G. Fliigel, and 
edited after his death by J. RSdiger and A. Miiller (2 vols., Leipzig, 
1871-1872). Fliigel had already ^ given a full analysis of the work 
in the Journal of the German Oriental Society, vol. xiii. (1859), pp. 
559-650; cf. E. G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia (London, 
1902), pp. 383-387. T. Houtsma supplied a lacuna in Flugel f s 
edition in the Vienna Oriental Journal, vol. iv. pp. 217 sqq. 


NADIR (Arabic naftr, " opposite to," used elliptically for 
nafir-es-semt, " opposite to the zenith ") , a term used in astronomy 
for the point in the heavens exactly opposite to the zenith, the 
zenith and nadir being the two poles of the horizon. It is thus 
used figuratively of the lowest depth of a person's spirits or the 
lowest point in a career. 


NAEGELI, KARL WILHELM VON (1817-1891), Swiss 
botanist, was bora on the 27th of March 1817 near Zurich. He 
studied botany under A. P. de Candolle at Geneva, and graduated 
with a botanical thesis at Zurich in 1840. His attention having 
been directed by M. J. Schleiden, then professor of botany at 
Jena, to the microscopical study of plants, he engaged more 
particularly in that branch of research. Soon after graduation 
he became Privat dozent and subsequently professor extra- 
ordinary, in the university of Zurich; in 1852 he was called 
to fill the chair of botany in the university of Freiburg-in- 
Breisgau; and in 1857 he was promoted to Munich, where he 
remained as professor until his death on the nth of May 1891. 
Among his more important contributions to science were a series 
of papers in the Zeiischrift filr wissenschaftlicke Botanik (1844- 
1846); Die neuern Algensystetne (1847); Gattungen einzelliger 
A I gen ( 1 849) ; Pflanzenphysiologische U titer suchungen (1855- 
1858), with C. E. Cramer; Bcitr&gc zur wisscnschaftlichen 
Botanik (1858-1868); a number of papers contributed to the 
Royal Bavarian Academy of Sciences, forming three volumes of 
Botanische Mitteilungen (1861-1881); and, finally, his volume, 
Meehanisch-physiologische Theorie der Abstammungslehre t pub- 
lished in 1884. 

The more striking of his many and varied discoveries are embodied 
in the Zeitsch.fur wiss. BoL In this we begin with Naegeli's extension 
of Robert Brown's discovery of the nucleus to the principal families 
of Cryptogams, and the assertion of its universal occurrence in plants, 
together with the recognition of its vesicular structure. There is 
further his investigation of the " mucous layer " (Schleimschicht) 
lining the wall of all normal cells, where he shows that it consists of 
granular " mucus," which, at an earlier stage, filled the cell-cayitv, 
and which differs chemically from the cell-wall in that it is nitro- 
genous. This layer he proved to be never absent from living cells — 
to be, in fact, itself the living part of the cell, a discovery which was 
simultaneously (1846) made by Hugo von Mohl (1 805-1 872), who 
gave to the living matter of the plant-body the name " protoplasm." 
n connexion with these discoveries, Naegeli controverted Schleiden f s 
view of the universality of free-cell-formation as the mode of cell- 
multiplication, and showed that in the vegetative organs, at least, 
new cells are formed by division. In the Zeiischrift, too, is Naegeli's 
most important algological work — such as the paper on Caulerpa, 
which brought to Tight the remarkable unseptate structure of the 
Siphoneae, and his research on Delesseria, which _ resulted in the 
discovery of growth by a single apical cell. ^ This discovery led 
Naegeli on to the study of the growing-point in other plants. He 
consequently gave the first accurate account of the apical cell, and 
of the mode of growth of the stem in various Mosses and Liverworts. 
Subsequently he observed that in Lycopodium and in Angiosperms 
the growing-point has no apical cell, but consists of a small-celled 
meristem, in which the first differentiation of the permanent tissues 
can be traced. One of the most remarkable discoveries recorded in 
the Zeiischrift is that of the antheridia and spermatozoids of Ferns 
and of Pilularia. The Beitrage zur wiss. Botanik consists almost 
entirely of researches into the anatomy of vascular plants, while 
the main feature of the Pflanzenphysiologische Unter suchungen is 
the exhaustive work on the structure, development and various 
forms of starch-grains. The Botanische Mitteilungen include^ a 
number of papers in all departments of botany, many of them being 
continuations and extensions of his earlier work. In his Theorie der 
Abstammungstehre Naegeli introduced the idea of a definite material 
basis for heredity; the substance he termed " idioplasm." Hjs 
theory of evolution is that the idioplasm of any one generation is 
not identical with that of either its progenitors or its progeny: 
it is always increasing in complexity, with the result that each succes- 
sive generation marks an advance upon its oredecessor. Hence 
variation takes place determinately, and in the higher direction only; 
while variability is the result of internal causes, and natural selection 
plays but a small part in evolution. Whereas, on the Darwinian 
theory, all organization is adaptive, according to Naegeli the develop- 
ment of higher organization is the outcome of the spontaneous 
evolution of the idioplasm. 

More detailed accounts of Naegeli's life and work are to be found 
in Nature^ 16th October 1891, and in Proc. Roy. Soc. f vol. li. 

(S.H.V.*) 


NAESTVED, a town of Denmark, in the ami (county) of 
Praesto, near the S.W. coast of Zealand, 59 m. by rail S.W. of 
Copenhagen. Pop. (1901) 7162. From 1140 to the Reformation 
it was one of the most important towns of the kingdom, though 
dependent upon the monastery of St Peter (founded here in 
H3S)- North of the town (i£ m.) lies Herlufsholm, where 
Admiral Herluf Trolle founded a Latin school in 1567, still 
extant. 


NAEVIUS, GNAEUS (c. 264-? 194 B.C.), Latin epic poet and 
dramatist. There is great uncertainty in regard to his life. 
From the expression of Gellius (i. 24. 1) characterizing his 
epitaph as written in a vein of " Campanian arrogance " it has 
been inferred that he was born in one of the Latin communities 
settled in Campania. But the phrase " Campanian arrogance " 
seems to have been used proverbially for "gasconade"; and, 
as there was a plebeian gens Naevia in Rome, it is quite as 
probable that he was by birth a Roman citizen. He served either 
in the Roman army or among the socii in the first Punic War, 
and thus must have reached manhood before 241. His career 
as a dramatic author began with the exhibition of a drama in 
or about the year 235, and continued for thirty years. Towards 
the close he incurred the hostility of some of the nobility, espe- 
cially, it is said, of the Metelli, by the attacks which he made 
upon them on the stage, and at their instance he was imprisoned 
(Plautus, Mil. Glor. 211). After writing two plays during his 
imprisonment, in which he is said to have apologized for his 
former rudeness (Gellius iii. 3. 15), he was liberated through the 
interference of the tribunes of the commons; but he had shortly 
afterwards to retire from Rome (in or about 204) to Utica. 
It may have been during his exile, when withdrawn from his 
active career as a dramatist, that he composed or completed his 
poem on the first Punic war. Probably his latest composition 
was the epitaph already referred to, written like the epic in 
Saturnian verse: — 

" Immortales mortalcs si foret fas flere, 
Flerent divae Camenae Naevium poetam; 
Itaque postquam est Orci traditus thesauro 
Obhti sunt Romai loquier lingua Latina." * 

If these lines were dictated by a jealousy of the growing ascend- 
ancy of Ennius, the life of Naevius must have been prolonged 
considerably beyond 204, the year in which Ennius began his 
career as an author in Rome. As distinguished from Livius 
Andronicus, Naevius was a native Italian, not a Greek; he was 
also an original writer, not a mere adapter or translator. If it 
was due to Livius that the forms of Latin literature were, from 
the first, moulded on those of Greek literature, it was due to 
Naevius that much of its spirit and substance was of native 
growth. 

Like Livius, Naevius professed to adapt Greek tragedies and 
comedies to the Roman stage. Among the titles of his tragedies are 
Aegisthus, Lycurgus, Andromache or Hector Projiciscens, Equus 
Trojanus, the last named being performed at the opening of Pompey's 
theatre (55). The national cast of his genius and temper was shown 
by his deviating from his Greek originals, and producing at least 
two specimens of the fabula praetexta (national drama) one founded 
on the childhood of Romulus and Remus {Lupus or Alimonium 
Romuli et Remi), the other called Clastidium, which celebrated the 
victory of M. Claudius Marcellus over the Celts (222). But it was. 
as a writer of comedy that he was most famous, most productive 
and most original. While he is never ranked as a writer of tragedy 
with Ennius, Pacuvius or Accius, he is placed in the canon of the 
grammarian Volcacius Sedigitus third (immediately after Caecilius 
and Plautus) in the rank of Roman comic authors. He is there 
characterized as ardent and impetuous in character and style. He 
is also appealed to, with Plautus and Ennius, as a master of his 
art in one of the prologues of Terence. His comedy, like that of 
Plautus, seems to have been rather a free adaptation of his originals 
than a rude copy of them, as those of Livius probably were, or an 
artistic copy like those of Terence. The titles of most of them, like 
those of Plautus, and unlike those of Caecilius and Terence, are 
Latin, not Greek. He drew from the writers of the old political 
comedy of Athens, as well as from the new comedy of manners, and he 
attempted to make the stage at Rome, as it had been at Athens, an 
arena of political and personal warfare. A strong spirit of partisanship 
is recognized in more than one of the fragments; and this spirit 
is thoroughly popular and adverse to the_ senatorial ascendancy 
which became more and more confirmed with the progress of the 
second Punic war. _ Besides his attack on the Metelli and other 
members of the aristocracy, the great Scipio is the object of a 
censorious criticism on account of a youthful escapade attributed to 
him. Among the few lines still remaining from his lost comedies, we 
seem to recognize the idiomatic force and rapidity of movement 
characteristic of the style of Plautus. There is also found that 
love of alliteration which is a marked feature in^ all the older 
Latin poets down even to Lucretius. _ In one considerable comic 
fragment attributed to him — the description of a coquette — there 
is great truth and shrewdness cf observation. But we find no 
trace of the exuberant comic power and geniality of his great con- 
temporary. 

He was not only the oldest native dramatist, but the first author 
of an epic poem (Bellum Punicum) — which', by combining the 
representation of actual contemporary history with a mythical 
background, may be said to have created the Roman type of epic 
poetry. The poem was one continuous work, but was divided into 
seven books by a grammarian of a later age. The earlier part of it 
treated of the mythical adventures of Aeneas in Sicily, Carthage 
and Italy, and borrowed from the interview of Zeus and Thetis in the 
first book of the Iliad the idea of the interview of Jupiter and Venus; 
which Virgil has made one of the cardinal passages in the Aeneid. 
The later part treated of the events of the first Punic war in the style 
of a metrical chronicle. An important influence in Roman literature 
and belief, which had its origin in Sicily, first appeared in this 
poem — the recognition of the mythical connexion of Aeneas and 
his Trojans with the foundation of Rome. The few remaining 
fragments produce the impression of vivid and rapid narrative^ to 
which the flow of the native Saturnian verse, in contradistinction 
to the weighty and complex structure of the hexameter, was naturally 
adapted. 

* The impression we get of the man is that, whether or not he 
actually enjoyed the full rights of Roman citizenship, he was a 

	1 " If it were permitted that immortals should weep for mortals, 
	the divine Camenae would weep for Naevius the poet ; for since he 
	hath passed into the treasure-house of death men have forgotten 
	at Rome how to speak in the Latin tongue." 

vigorous representative of the bold combative spirit of the ancient 
Roman commons. He was one of those who made the Latin 
language into a great organ of literature. The phrases still 
quoted from him have nothing of an antiquated sound, while they 
have a genuinely idiomatic ring. As a dramatist he worked more 
in the spirit of Plautus than of Ennius, Pacuvius, Accius or 
Terence; but the great Umbrian humorist is separated from his 
older contemporary, not only by his breadth of comic power, but 
by his general attitude of moral and political indifference. The 
power of Naevius was the more genuine Italian gift — the power of 
satiric criticism — which was employed in making men ridiculous, 
not, like that of Plautus, in extracting amusement from the 
humours, follies and eccentricities of life. Although our means of 
forming a fair estimate of Naevius are scanty, all that we do 
know of him leads to the conclusion that he was far from being 
the least among the makers of Roman literature, and that 
with the loss of his writings there was lost a vein of national 
feeling and genius which rarely reappears. 

Fragments (dramas) in L. M tiller, Livi Andronici et Cn. Naevi 
Fabularum Reliquiae (1885), and (Bellum Punicum) in his edition 
of Ennius (1884); monographs by E. Klussmann (1843); M. J. 
Berchcm (1861); D. de Moor (1877); Mommsen, History of Rome, 
bk, iii., ch. 14. On Virgil's indebtedness to Naevius and Ennius, 
see V. Crivellari, Quae praecipue hausit Vergilius ex Naevio et Ennio 
(1889). 


NAEVUS, a term in surgery signifying that form of tumour 
which is almost entirely composed of enlarged blood-vessels. 
There are three principal varieties: (1) the capillary naevus, 
consisting of enlarged capillaries, frequently of a purplish colour, 
hence the term " port- wine stain "; (2) the venous naevus, in 
which the veins are enlarged, of a bluish colour; (3) the arterial 
naevus, in which there is distinct pulsation, it being composed 
of enlarged and tortuous arteries. The naevus can be lessened 
in size by pressure. It generally occurs in the skin or immediately 
under it; sometimes it lies in the mouth in connexion with the 
raucous membrane. It is often congenital, hence the term 
" mother's mark," or it may appear in early childhood. It often 
grows rapidly, sometimes slowly, and sometimes growth .is 
checked, and it may gradually diminish in size, losing its vascu- 
larity and becoming fibrous and non-vascular. This natural cure 
is followed by less deformity than a cure by artificial means. 
Various methods are used by surgeons when an operation is 
called for: (1) the tumour may be excised; (2) a ligature tightly 
tied may be applied to the base of the tumour; (3) inflammation 
may be set up in the growth by the injection of irritating agents, 
— in this way its vascularity may be checked and the formation 
of fibrous tissue encouraged; (4) the blood in the enlarged vessels 
may be coagulated by the injection of coagulating agents or by 
electrolysis. * 


NAGA HILLS, a district of British India in the Hills division 
of Eastern Bengal and Assam. It forms part of the mountainous 
borderland lying between the Brahmaputra valley and Upper 
Burma. Area, 3070 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 102,402. Towards the 
N. lie the Patkoi hills, over which British jurisdiction has never 
been extended; but since 1904 the southern tract, formerly 
known as the " area of political control," has been incorporated 
in the district, thus extending its E. boundary from the Dikho 
to the Tizic river. The whole country forms a wild expanse of 
forest, mountain and stream. The valleys are covered with 
dense jungle, dotted with small lakes and marshes. Coal is 
known to exist in many localities, as well as iron ore and petro- 
leum. The administrative headquarters of the district are at 
Kohima (pop. 3093), which is garrisoned by two companies of 
native infantry and a battalion of military police. The Dimapur- 
Manipur cart-road crosses the hills, connecting Kohima with 
the Assam-Bengal railway. 

Naga means " naked," and is the term applied by the Assamese 
to the wild tribes of the hills, of which the chief clans are called 
Angami, Ao, Shota, Sema and Rengma. These tribes have 
shown extraordinary obstinacy in their resistance to the British 
arms. Between 1832 and 1849 ten armed expeditions were 
despatched to chastise them, and from 1866 to 1887 there were 
eight more, a record which exceeds that of the most turbulent 
tribes on the North- West Frontier. Since 1892, however, little 
trouble has been experienced. 

See Naga Hills District Gazetteer (Calcutta, 1905). 


NAGAR, formerly Bednur, a village and ruined city of Mysore, 
India; pop. (1901) 715. About 1640 the seat of government of 
the rajas of Keladi was transferred to this place. When taken 
by Hyder Ali in 1763, it is said to have yielded a plunder of 
twelve millions. In 1783 it surrendered to a British detachment 
under General Matthews, but being shortly after invested by 
Tippoo Sultan, the garrison capitulated on condition of safe 
conduct to the coast. Tippoo violated the stipulation, put 
General Matthews and the principal officers to death, and 
imprisoned the remainder of the force. 


NAGARJUNA, a celebrated Buddhist philosopher and writer. 
He is constantly quoted in the literature of the later schools 
of Buddhism, and a very large number of works in Sanskrit is 
attributed to him. None of these has been critically edited or 
translated; and there is much uncertainty as to the exact date 
of his career, and as to his opinions. The most probable date 
seems to be the early part of the 3rd century a.d. He seems to 
have been born in the south of India, and to have lived under the 
patronage of a king of southern Kosala, the modern Chattisgarh. 
Chinese and Tibetan authorities differ as to the name of this 
monarch; but it apparently is meant to represent an Indian 
name Satavahana, which is a dynastic title, not a personal name. 
Of the works he probably wrote one was a treatise advocating 
the Madhyamaka views of which he is the reputed founder; 
another a long and poetical prose work on the stages of the 
Bodhisattva career; and a third a voluminous commentary on 
the Mahdprajnd-pdrdmitd Sutra. Chinese tradition ascribes 
to him special knowledge of herbs, of astrology, of alchemy 
and of medicine. Two medical treatises, one on prescriptions in 
general, the other on the treatment of eye-disease, are said, by 
Chinese writers, to be by him. Several poems of a didactic 
character are also ascribed to him. The best known of these 
poems is The Friendly Epistle addressed to King Udayana. 
A translation into English of a Tibetan version of this piece has 
been published by Dr Wenzel. 

Authorities. — H. Wenzel, Journal of the Pali Text Society 
(1866), pp. 1-32; T. Watters, On Yuan Chwang, ed. by Rhys Davids 
and S. W. Bushell (London, 1904-1905). Taranatha's Geschichte 
des Buddhismus in Indien, trans. Anton Schiefner (Leipzig, 1869); 
W. Wassiljew, Der Buddhismus (Leipzig, i860). (T. W. R. D.) 


NAGASAKI* a town on the south-west of the island of Kiushiu, 
Japan, in 32 44' N., 129 51' E., with 163,324 (1905) inhabitants, 
and a foreign settlement containing a population of 400 (ex- 
cluding Chinese). The first port of entry for ships coming from 
the south or the west to Japan, it lies at the head of a beautiful 
inlet some 3 m. long, which forms a splendid anchorage, and is 
largely used hy ships coming to coal and by warships. Marine 
products, coal and cotton goods are the chief exports, and raw 
cotton, iron, as well as other metals and materials used for ship- 
building, constitute the principal imports. The value of imports 
approaches £2,000,000 annually. That of exports has fluctuated 
considerably. In 1889 it was £1,005,367, but in 1894 it was only 
£444,839, and does not generally exceed £450,000. The most 
important industries of the town are represented by the engine 
works of Aka-no-ura, three large docks and a patent slip, the 
property of the Mitsu Bishi Company. Steamers of over 6000 
tons have been constructed at these docks, which, as well as the 
engine works, are situated on the western shore of the inlet. 
The brisk atmosphere of business that pervades them does not 
reach the town on the eastern side, which lies under the shadow of 
forests of tombstones that cover the over-looking hills. Nagasaki 
is noted as a coaling station. The coal is obtained chiefly from 
Takashima, an islet 8 m. S.E. of the entrance to the harbour, 
and in lesser quantities from two other islets, Naka-no-shima 
and Ha-shima, which lie about 1 m. farther out. These sources 
of supply, however, show signs of exhaustion. There are several 
favourite health resorts in the neighbourhood of Nagasaki, 
notably Unzen, with its sulphur springs. 

- Nagasaki owed its earliest importance to foreign intercourse. 
Originally called Fukae-no-ura (Fukae Bay), it was included in 
the fief of Nagasaki Kotaro in the 12th century, and from him 
it took its name. But it remained an insignificant village until 
the 1 6th century, when, becoming the headquarters of Japanese 
Christianity, and subsequently the sole emporium of foreign 
trade in the hands of the Dutch and the Chinese, it developed 
considerable prosperity. The opening of the port of Moji for 
export trade deprived Nagasaki of its monopoly as a coaling 
station, and the visits of war vessels were reduced when Russia 
acquired Port Arthur, Great Britain Wei-hai-wei and Germany 
Kiaochow. On the north side of the channel by which the 
harbour is entered there stands a cliff called Takaboko, which, 
under the name of Pappenberg, has long been rendered notorious 
by a tradition that thousands of Christians were precipitated 
from it in the 17th century because they refused to trample on 
the Cross. It has been conclusively proved that the legend 
is untrue. 


NAGAURE or Nagore, a town in India, in Jodhpur state of 
Rajputana, with a station on the Jodhpur-Bikanir railway. 
Pop. (1901) 13,377. Nagaur is surrounded by a wall more than 
4 m. in circuit. It has given its name to a famous breed of cattle. 


NAGELSBACH,* CARL FRIEDRICH (1806-1859), German 
classical scholar, was born at Wohrd near Nuremburg on the 28th 
of March 1806. After studying at Erlangen and Berlin, he 
accepted in 1827 an appointment at the Nuremberg gymnasium, 
and was professor of classics at Erlangen'from 1842 till his death 
on the 21st of April 1859. Nagelsbach is chiefly known for his 
excellent Lateinische Stilistik (1846; 9th ed. by Ivan Miiller, 
1905). Two other important works by him are Die Homerische 
Theologie (1840; 3rd ed. by G. Autenrieth, 1886) and Die 
Nachhomerische Theologie (1857). 

See J. L. Doederlein, Geddchtnissrede fur Herrn K. F. Nagelsbach 
(1859); article by G. Autenrieth in AUgemeine Deutsche Biographic, 
xxiii. (1886). 


NAGINA, a town of British India, in Bijnor district of the 
United Provinces, on the Oudh & Rohilkhand railway, 48 m. 
N.W. of Moradabad. Pop. (1901) 21,412. There is considerable 
trade in sugar, besides manufactures of guns, glassware (especially 
bottles for the use of pilgrims carrying the sacred water of the 
Ganges from Hardwar), ebony wares, hemp-sacking and cotton 
cloth. 


NAGODE, a native state of Central India, in the Baghelkhand 
agency. Area, 501 sq. m. Pop. (1901) 67,092, showing a de- 
crease of 20% in the decade, due to famine; estimated revenue, 
£11,000. The chief, whose title is raja, is a Rajput of the Parihar 
clan. The town of Nagode is 17 m. W. of the British station of 
Sutna. Pop. (1901) 3887. It was formerly a military canton- 
ment, and has an Anglo- vernacular school and dispensary. 
The former capital (until 1720) was Unchahra. 


NAGOYA, the capital of the province of Owari, Japan, on 
the great trunk railway of Japan, 235 m. from Tokyo and 94 m. 
from Kioto. Pop. (1903) 284,829. It is the fifth of the chief 
cities in Japan. It lies near the head of the shallow Isenumi 
Bay, about 30 m. from the port of Yokkaichi, with which it 
communicates by light-draught steamers and by rail. The 
castle o! Nagoya, erected in 1610, never suffered in war, but in 
modern times became a military dep6t; the interior contains 
much splendid decoration. The central keep of the citadel is 
a remarkable structure, covering close upon half an acre, but 
rapidly diminishing in each of its five storeys till the top room 
is only about 12 yds. square. Gabled roofs and hanging rafters 
break the almost pyramidal outline; and a pair of gold-plated 
dolphins 8 ft. high form a striking finial. Both were removed 
in 1872, and one of them was at the Vienna Exhibition in 1873; 
but they have been restored to their proper site. The religious 
buildings of Nagoya include a very fine Buddhist temple, Higashi 
Honjgwanji. Nagoya is well known as one of the great seats of the 
pottery trade; 13 J m. distant are the potteries of Seto, where 
the first glazed pottery made in Japan was produced by Kato 
Shirozaemon, after a visit to China in 1229. From Kato's time 
Seto continued, during several centuries, to be the chief centre 
of ceramic production in Japan, the manufacture of porcelain 
being added to that of pottery in the 19th century. All the 
products of the flourishing industry now carried on there and at 
other places in the province are transported to Nagoya, for sale 
there or for export. Cotton mills have been established, and an 
extensive business is carried on in the embroidery of handker- 
chiefs. Another of its celebrated manufactures is arimatsu- 
skibori, or textile fabrics (silk or cotton), dyed so as to show spots 
in relief from which the colour radiates. It is further distin- 
guished as the birthplace of cloisonne enamelling in Japan, all 
" work of that nature before 1838 — when a new departure was made 
by Kaji Tsunekichi — having been for purposes of subordinate 
decoration. Quantities of cloisonne enamels are now produced 
in the town. 


NAGPUR, a city, district and division of British India, in the 
Central Provinces. The city is 1125 ft. above the sea; railway 
station, 520 m. E. of Bombay. Pop. (1901) 127,734. The town 
is well laid out, with several parks and artificial lakes, and has 
numerous Hindu temples. The prettily wooded suburb of Sita- 
baldi contains the chief government buildings, the houses of 
Europeans, the railway station and the cantonments, with fort 
and arsenal. In the centre stands Sitahaldi Hill, crowned with 
the fort. Beyond the station lies the broad sheet of water 
known as the Jama Talao,and farther east is the city, completely 
hidden in a mass of foliage. Handsome tanks and gardens, 
constructed by the Mahratta princes, lie outside the city. The 
palace, built of black basalt and profusely ornamented with 
wood carving, was burnt down in 1864, and only the great gate- 
way remains. The garrison consists of detachments of European 
and native infantry from Kampti. Nagpur is the headquarters 
of two corps of rifle volunteers. It is the junction of two im- 
portant railway systems — the Great Indian Peninsula to .Bombay 
and the Bengal-Nagpur to Calcutta. The large weaving popu- 
lation maintain their reputation for producing fine fabrics. 
There are steam cotton mills and machinery for ginning and 
pressing cotton. The gaol contains an important printing 
establishment. Education is provided by two aided colleges — 
the Hislop and the Morris, called after a missionary and a former 
chief commissioner; four high schools; a law school; an 
agricultural school, with a class for the scientific training of 
teachers; a normal school; a zenana mission for the manage- 
ment of girls' schools; an Anglican and two Catholic schools for 
Europeans. There are several libraries and reading rooms, 
and an active Anjuman or Mahommedan society. 

The District of Nagpur has an area of 384 sq. m. Pop. 
(1901) 751,844. It lies immediately below the great tableland 
of the Satpura range. A second line of hills shuts in the district 
on the south-west, and a third runs from north to south, parting 
the country into two plains of unequal size. These hills are all 
offshoots of the Satpuras, and nowhere attain any great ele- 
vation. Their heights are rocky and sterile, but the valleys and 
lowlands yield rich crops of corn and garden produce. The 
western plain slopes down to the river Wardha, is watered by the 
Jam and Madar, tributaries of the Wardha, and contains the 
most highly-tilled land in the district, abounding in fruit trees 
and the richest garden cultivation. The eastern plain (six times 
the larger), stretching away to the confines of Bhandara and 
Chanda, consists of a rich undulating country, luxuriant with 
mango groves and dotted towards the east with countless small 
tanks. It is watered by the Kanhan, with its tributaries, which 
flows into the Wainganga beyond the district. The principal 
crops are millets, wheat, oil-seeds and cotton. There are steam 
factories for ginning and pressing cotton at the military canton- 
ment of Kampti, which was formerly the chief centre of trades. 
An important new industry is manganese mining. The district 
is traversed hy the two lines of railway which meet at Nagpur 
city, and several branches are under construction. 

The Division of Nagpur comprises the five districts of Nagpur, 
Bhandara, Chanda, Wardha and Balaghat. Area, 23,521 sq. m. 
Pop. (1901) 3,728,063, showing a decrease of 9% in the decade. 

See Nagpur District Gazetteer (Bombay, 1908). 


NAGYKANIZSA, a town of Hungary, in the county of Zala, 
137 m. S.W. of Budapest by rail. Pop. (1900) 23,255. It 
possesses distilleries and brick-making factories, and has trade 
in cereals and cattle. Nagykanizsa once ranked as the second 
fortress of Hungary, and consequently played an important part 
during the wars with the Turks, who, having gained possession 
of it in 1600, held it until, in 1690, after a siege of two years, 
it was recovered by the Austrian and Hungarian forces. In 
1702 the fortifications were destroyed. 


NAGYKIKINDA, a town of Hungary, in the county of Torontal, 
152 m. S.E. of Budapest by rail. Pop. (1900) 24,843, of which 
about 60% are Servians. Being one of the centres of production 
of the famous wheat of the Banat, its flour industry is important. 
Fruit-farming and cattle-rearing are extensively carried on in the 
neighbourhood. 


NAGYSZEBEN (Ger. Hermannstadt, Rumanian Sibiu), a town 
of Hungary, in Transylvania, the capital of the county of 
Szeben, 122 m. S. S.E. of Kolozsvar by rail. Pop. (1900) 26,077, 
of whom 16,141 were Saxons (Germans), 7106 Rumanians, 
and 5747 Magyars. It is beautifully situated at an altitude 
of 141 1 ft. in the fertile valley of the Cibin (Hungarian, Szeben), 
encircled on all sides by the Transylvanian Alps. It is the seat 
of a Greek Orthodox (Rumanian) archbishop, and of the super- 
intendent of the Protestants for the Transylvanian circle. Some 
parts of Nagyszeben have a medieval appearance, with houses 
built in the old German style. The most noteworthy of its public 
buildings is the handsome Protestant Church, begun in the 14th 
century and finished in 1520, in the Gothic style, containing a 
beautiful cup-shaped font, cast by Meister Leonhardus in 1438, 
and a large mural painting of the Crucifixion by Johannes von 
Rosenau (144s). In the so-called New Church, comprising the 
west part of the whole building, which is an addition of the 
1 6th century, are many beautiful memorials of Saxon notables. 
Other buildings are: the Roman Catholic parish church, founded 
in 1726; the church of the Ursuline nuns, built in 1474; the 
town hall, an imposing building of the 1 5th century, purchased 
by the municipality in 1545 and containing the archives of the 
"Saxon nation." The Brukenthal palace, built in 1777-1787 
by Baron Samuel von Brukenthal (1721-1803), governor of 
Transylvania, contains an interesting picture-gallery with good 
examples of the Dutch school, and a library. The museum 
contains a natural history section with the complete fauna 
and flora of Transylvania, and a rich ethnographical section. 
Nagyszeben has a law academy, a seminary for Greek Orthodox 
priests, a military academy and several secondary schools. 
There are manufactures of cloth, linen, leather, caps, boots, 
soap, candles, ropes, as well as breweries and distilleries. 

The German name of the town is traceable to Hermann, a 
citizen of Nuremberg, who about the middle of the 12th century 
established a colony on the spot. In the 13th century it bore' 
the name of Villa Hermanni. Under the last monarchs of the 
native Magyar dynasty Hermannstadt enjoyed exceptional 
privileges, and its commerce with the East rose to importance. 
In the course of the 15th and 16th centuries it was several 
times besieged by the Turks. At the beginning of 1849 it was 
the scene of several engagements between the Austrians and 
Hungarians; and later in the year it was several times taken 
and retaken by the Russians and Hungarians. 


NAGYSZOMBAT (Ger. Tyrnau), a town of Hungary, in the 
county of Pozsony, 115 m. N.W. of Budapest by rail. Pop. 
(1900) 12,422. It is situated on the Trnava, and has played an 
important r6Ie in the ecclesiastical history of Hungary. It 
gained prominence after 1543, when the archbishop of Esztergom 
and primate of Hungary made it his residence after the capture 
of Esztergom by the Turks. In consequence numerous churches 
and convents were built, and the town acquired the title of " Little 
Rome." It possesses a Roman Catholic seminary for priests, 
and was the seat of a university founded in 1635, which was 
transferred to Budapest in 1777. In 1820 the archbishop's 
residence was again removed to Esztergom. It has an active 
trade in cereals and cattle. 


NAGY-VARAD (Ger. Grosswardein) , a town of Hungary, 
capital of the county of Bihar, 153 m. E.S.E. of Budapest by 
rail. Pop. (1900) 47,018. It is situated in a plain on both banks 
of the river Seheskoros, and is the seat of a Roman Catholic 
and of a Greek (Old-United) bishopric. Among its principal 
buildings are the St Ladislaus parish church, built in 1723, 
which contains the remains of the king St Ladislaus (d. 1095), 
the Roman Catholic cathedral, built in 1 752-1 779, the Greek 
cathedral, the large palace of the Roman Catholic bishop, built 
in 1778 in the rococo style, the archaeological and historical 
museum, with an interesting collection of ecclesiastical art, and 
the county and town hall. Among the educational establishments 
are a law academy, a seminary for priests, a modern school, 
a Roman Catholic and a Calvinistic gymnasium, a commercial 
academy, a training school for teachers and a secondary school 
for girls. Nagy-Varad is an important railway junction; it 
possesses extensive manufactures of pottery and large distilleries, 
and carries on a brisk trade in agricultural produce, cattle, horses, 
fruit and wine. About 6 m. S. of the town is the village of Hajo, 
which contains the Piispok Ftirdo or Bishop's Baths, with warm 
saline and sulphurous waters (92 to 103 F.), used both for 
drinking and bathing in cases of anaemia and scrofula. 

Nagy-Varad is one of the oldest towns in Hungary. Its 
bishopric was founded by St Ladislaus in 1080. The town 
was destroyed by the Tatars in 1241. Peace was concluded 
here on the 24th of February 1538 between Ferdinand I. of 
Austria and his rival John Zapolya, voivode of Transylvania. 
In 1556 it passed into the possession of Transylvania, but 
afterwards reverted to Austria. In 1598 the fortress was un- 
successfully besieged by the Turks, but it fell into their hands 
in 1660 and was recovered by the Austrians in 1692. The 
Greek Old-United or Catholic bishopric was founded in 1776. 


NAHE, a river of Germany, a left-bank tributary of, the Rhine, 
rises near Selbach in the Oldenburg principality of Birkenfeld. 
For some distance it forms the boundary between the Bavarian 
Palatinate and the Prussian Rhine Province, and it falls into the 
Rhine at Bingen. Its length is 78 m., but it is too shallow and 
rocky to be navigable. Its picturesque valley, through which 
runs the railway from Bingerbriick to Neunkirchen, is largely 
visited by tourists. 

See Schneegans, Geschichte des Ndhetals (Kreuznach, 1890). 


NAHUATLAN STOCK, a North and Central American Indian 
stock. Nahuas or Nahuatlecas was the collective name for the 
dominant Indian peoples of Mexico at the time of the Spanish 
conquest, and the Nahuatlan stock consisted of the Nahuas (or 
Aztecs) and a few scattered tribes in Central America. 


NAHUM (Hebrew for " rich in comfort [is God] "), an Old 
Testament prophet. The name occurs only in the book of Nahum ; 
in Nehemiah vii. 7 it is a scribal error for " Renum," Of the 
prophet himself all that is known is the statement of the title 
that he was an Elkoshite. But the locality denoted by the 
designation is quite uncertain. Later tradition associated 
Nahum with the region of Nineveh, against which he prophesied, 
and hence his tomb has been located at a place bearing the name 
of Alkush near Mosul (anc. Nineveh) and is still shown. 1 Accord- 
ing to Jerome, the prophet was a native of a village in Galilee, 
which bore the name of Elkesi in the 4th century a.d. (the Galilean 
town of Capernaum, which probably means " village of Nahum," 
may also point in the same direction; but cf. John vii. 29, 
which seems to imply that in the time of Christ no prophet 
was supposed to have come out of GaJilee). E. Nestle has 
proposed to locate Elkesi " beyond Betogabra " {i.e. Eleuthero- 
polis, mod. Beit Jibrin) in the tribe of Simeon (cf. Pal. ExpL 
Fund Quart. Statement, 1879, pp. 136-138). 

Book of Nahum. — The original heading of Nahum's prophecy 
is contained in the second part of the superscription: "[The 
book of] the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite " (cf. the similar 
headings in Isaiah, Obadiah and Habakkuk). The first part 
(" Oracle concerning Nineveh ") is a late editorial insertion, but 
correctly describes the main contents of the little book. 

Contents of the Book. (1) Chapters i. and ii. — The prophecy 
against Nineveh in its present form really begins with chap. ii. 1, 
followed immediately by v. 3, and readily falls into three parts, 
viz. (a) ii. 1, 3-10; (b) ii. M-13; and (c) iii. Here (a) describes in 
language of considerable descriptive power the assault on Nineveh — 

	1 Jonah's grave has been located similarly in Nineveh itself. 

the city is mentioned by name in ii, 8 (9 Heb. text) — its capture 
and sack; (b) contains an oracle of Yahweh directed against the 
king of Assyria (" Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of 
Hosts," v. 13); (c) again gives a vivid picture of war and desolation 
which are to overtake and humiliate Nineveh, as they have already 
overtaken No-Amon (i.e. Egyptian Thebes, w. 8-10); the defence 
is pictured as futile and the rum complete. The absence of dis- 
tinctly religious motive from these chapters is remarkable; the 
divine name occurs only in the repeated refrain, " Behold, I am 
against thee, saith the Lord of Hosts," ii. 13, iii. 5. They express 
little more than merely human indignation at the oppression of 
the world-power, and picture with undisguised satisfaction the 
storm of war which overwhelms the imperial city. 

(2) Chapter i. forms the exordium to the prophecy of doom 
against Nineveh in the book as it lies before us. Its tone is exalted, 
and a fine picture is given of Yahweh appearing in judgment: 
"The Lord (Yahweh) is a jealous God and avengeth; the Lord 
avengeth and is full of wrath." The effects of the divine anger on 
the physical universe are forcibly described tyv. 3-6); on the 
other hand, God cares for those ' that put their trust in Him " 
(v. 7), but overwhelms His enemies (w. 8-i2a); in the following 
verses (126-15) the joyful news is conveyed to Judah of»the fall of 
the oppressor: — " Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace 1 Keep thy feasts, O 
Judah, perform thy vows; for the wicked one shall no more pass 
through thee; he is utterly cut off" (v. 15). 

Regarding chap. i. and ii. 2( = i. and ii. I, 3, Heb. text) there has 
been much discussion in recent years. It was long ago noticed that 
traces of an alphabetic acrostic survive in this section of the book; 
throughout the whole of chap. i. there is no reference to Nineveh, 
though in some of the verses (8-i2a, 14) .the enemies of Yahweh are 
addressed, who have usually been identified with the people or city 
of Nineveh; in w. 126, 13 and (certainly) v. 15 ( = ii. 1 Heb.) 
Judah appears to be addressed. The text of i. 1-15, ii. 1-2 has been 
reconstructed by H. Gunkel and G. Bickell so as to form a complete 
alphabetic psalm with contents of an eschatological character, and 
is regarded by them as a later addition to the book. It may be a 
14 generalizing supplement " prefixed by the editor, possibly because 
the original introduction to the oracle had been mutilated. It is 
generally held by critical scholars that i. 1-8, 13, 15, and ii. 2 cer- 
tainly do not proceed from Nahum; i. 9-12 may, however, belong 
to the prophet. The phenomena are conflicting and a completely 
satisfactory solution seems to be impossible. 

Date of Nahum's Oracle. — The date of the composition of 
Nahum's prophecy must lie between 607-606, when Nineveh was 
captured and destroyed by the Babylonians and Medes, and the 
capture of Thebes (No-Amon) which is alluded to in iii. 8-10. 
This was effected for the second time and most completely by 
Assur-bani-pal in 663 or 662 B.C. The tone of the prophecy 
suggests, on the one hand, that the fall of Nineveh is imminent, 
while, on the other, the reference to Thebes suggests that the 
disaster that had befallen it was still freshly remembered. On 
the whole a date somewhat near 606 is more probable. It is 
noteworthy that no reference is made to the restoration of the 
northern kingdom of Israel, or the return of its exiles. The poetry 
of the book is of a high order. 

Bibliography. — The Commentaries on the Minor Prophets, 
especially those of J. Wellhausen, D. W. Nowack and K. Marti 
(all German) ; G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (2 vols.) ; 
A. B. Davidson, Nahum, Habakkuk and Zephaniah (Camb. Bible, 
1896). (G. H. Bo.) 


NAIK, or Nayak, from a Sanskrit word meaning a leader, a 
title used in India in various senses. In the army it denotes a 
rank corresponding to that of corporal ; and Hyder Ah" of Mysore 
was proud of being called Haidar Naik, analogous to " le petit 
caporal " for Napoleon. It was also the title of the petty 
dynasties that arose in S. India on the downfall of the Hindu 
empire of Vijayanagar in the 16th century. 


NAIL (O. Eng. naegal, cf. Dutch, Ger.,Swed.«a^/; the word is 
also related to Lat. unguis, Gr. 6Vu£ , Sans, nakhas) a word applied 
both to the horny covering to the upper surface of the extremities 
of the fingers and toes of man and the Quadrumana (see Skin 
and Dermal Skeleton), and also to a headed pin or spike of 
metal, commonly of iron. The principal use of nails is in wood- 
work (joinery and carpentery), but they are also employed in 
numerous other trades. Size, form of head, nature of point, and 
special uses all give names to different classes of nails. Thus we 
have tacks, sprigs and brads for very small nails; rose, clasp 
and clout, according to the form of head; and flat points or 
sharp points according to the taper of the spike. According to 
the method of manufacture nails fall into four principal classes: 
(i) hand-wrought nails; (2) machine-wrought and cut nails; 
(3) wire or French nails; and (4) cast nails. 

The nailer handicraft was formerly a great industry in the 
country around Birmingham. The nails are forged from nail- 
rods heated in a small smith's hearth, hammered on an anvil, the 
nail length cut off on a chisel and the head formed by dropping 
the spike into a hole in a " bolster " of steel, from which enough 
of the spike is left projecting to form the head. In the case of 
clasp nails the head is formed with two strokes of the hammer, 
while rose nails require four. The heads of the larger-sized nails 
are made with an " oliver " or mechanical hammer, and for 
ornamental or stamped heads " swages " or dies are employed. 
The conditions of life and labour among the hand nailers in 
England were exceedingly unsatisfactory: married women and 
young children of both sexes working long hours in small filthy 
sheds attached to their dwellings; their employment was con- 
trolled by middle-men or nail-masters, who supplied them with 
the nail-rods and paid for work done, sometimes in money and 
sometimes in kind on the truck system. Machine-wrought and cut 
nails have supplanted most corresponding kinds of hand-made 
nails. Horse nails are still made by hand-labour. These are 
made from the finest Swedish charcoal iron, hammered out to a 
sharp point. They must be tough and homogeneous throughout, 
so that there may be no danger of their breaking over and leaving 
portions in the hoof. 

In 161 7 Sir D. Bulmer devised a machine for cutting nail-rods, 
and in 1 790 T. Clifford patented a device for shaping the rods, but 
the credit of perfecting machinery mainly belongs to American 
enterprise (the first American patent appears to be that of 
Ezekiel Reed, dated 1786). The machine, fed with heated (to 
black heat only) strips of metal, usually mild steel, having a 
breadth and thickness sufficient for the nail to be made, shears 
off by its sheer the " nail blank," which, falling down, is firmly 
clutched at the neck till a heading die strikes against its upper 
end and forms the head, the completed nail passing out through 
an inclined shoot. In large nails the taper of the shank and 
point is secured by the sectional form to which the strips are 
rolled; brads, sprigs and small nails, on the other hand, are cut 
from uniform strips in an angular direction from head to point, 
the strip being turned over after each blank is cut so that the 
points and heads are taken from opposite sides alternately, and 
a uniform taper on two opposite sides of the nail, from head to 
point, is secured. The machines turn out nails with wonderful 
rapidity, varying with the size of the nails produced from about 
100 to 1000 per minute. Wire or French nails are made from 
round wire, which is unwound, straightened, cut into lengths and 
headed by a machine either by intermittent blows or by pressure, 
but the pointing is accomplished by the pressure of dies. Cast 
nails, which are cast in sand moulds by the ordinary process, are 
used principally for horticultural purposes, and the hob-nails or 
tackets of shoemakers are also cast. 

See Peter Barlow, Encyclopaedia of Arts, Manufactures and 
Machinery (1848); Bucknall Smith, wire, Its Manufacture and 
Uses (New York, 1891). 


NAIL VIOLIN (Ger. Nagelgeigej Nagdharmonica), a musical 
curiosity invented by Johann Wilde, a musician in the imperial 
orchestra at St Petersburg. The nail violin or harmonica consists 
of a wooden soundboard about i£ ft. long and 1 ft. wide bent into 
a semicircle. In this soundboard are fixed a number of iron or 
brass nails of different lengths, tuned to give a chromatic scale. 
Sound is produced by friction with a strong bow, strung with 
black horsehair. An improved instrument, now in the collection 
of the Hochschule in Berlin, has two half-moon sound-chests of 
different sizes, one on the top of the other, forming terraces. In 
the rounded wall of the upper sound-chest are two rows of iron 
staples, the upper giving the diatonic scale, and the lower the 
intermediate chromatic semitones. History records the name of 
a single virtuoso on this instrument, which has a sweet bell-like 
tone but limited technical possibilities; he was a Bohemian 
musician called Senal, who travelled all over Germany with his 
instrument about 1 780-1 790. (K. S.) 


NAINI TAL, a town and district of British India, in the 
Kumaon division of the United Provinces. The town is 6400 ft. 
above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 7609. Naini Tal is a popular 
sanatorium for the residents in the plains, and the summer head- 
quarters of the government of the province. It is situated on a 
lake, surrounded by high mountains, and is subject to landslides; 
a serious catastrophe of this kind occurred in September 1880. 
The approach from the plains is by the Rohilkhand and Kumaon 
railway from Bareilly, which has its terminus at Kathgodam, 
22 m. distant by cart road. There are several European schools, 
besides barracks and convalescent dep6t for European soldiers. 

The District of Naini Tal comprises the lower hills of 
Kumaon and the adjoining Tarai or submontane strip. Area, 
2677 sq. m. Pop. (1901) 311*237, showing a decrease of 15-4% 
in the decade. The district includes the Gagar and other 
foothills of the Himalayas, which reach an extreme height of 
nearly 9000 ft. The Bhabar tract at their base consists of boulders 
from the mountains, among which the hill streams are swallowed 
up. Forests cover vast tracts of the hill-country and the Bhabar. 
Beyond this is the Tarai, moist and extremely unhealthy. Here 
the principal crops are rice and wheat. In the hills a small 
amount of tea is grown, and a considerable quantity of fruit. 
The only railway is the line to Kathgodam. 

See Naini Tal District Gazetteer (Allahabad, 1904). 


NAIRN, a royal, municipal and police burgh and county town 
of Nairnshire, Scotland. Pop. of the royal burgh (1901) 5089. 
It is situated on the Moray Firth, at the mouth of the Nairn and 
on its left bank, 15J m. N.E. of Inverness by the Highland 
railway. The town, though of immemorial age, shows no signs 
of its antiquity, being bright, neat and modern. It attracts 
many summer visitors by its good sea bathing and excellent 
golf-course. The industries include salmon fishing, deep-sea 
fishing, the making of rope and twine and the freestone quarries 
of the neighbourhood. There is a commodious harbour with 
breakwater and pier. Nairn belongs to the Inverness district 
group of parliamentary burghs (Forres, Fortrose, Inverness and 
Nairn). Nairn was originally called Invernarne (the mouth of 
theNairn). It was made a royal burgh by Alexander I. (d. 1124), 
but this charter having been lost it was confirmed by James VI. 
in 1589. 


NAIRNE, CAROLINA, Baroness (1766-1845), Scottish song 
writer, was born in the " auld hoose " of Gask, Perthshire, on 
the 16th of August 1766. She was descended from an old family 
which had settled in Perthshire in the 13th century, and could 
boast of kinship with the royal race of Scotland.' Her father, 
Laurence Oliphant, was one of the foremost supporters of the 
Jacobite cause, and she was named Carolina in memory of Prince 
Charles Edward. In the schoolroom she was known as " pretty 
Miss Car," and afterwards her striking beauty and pleasing 
manners earned for her the name of the " Flower of Stratheam." 
In 1806 she married W. M. Nairne, who became Baron Nairne 
(see below) in 1824. Following the example set by Burns in the 
Scots Musical Museum, she undertook to bring out a collection 
of national airs set to appropriate words. To the collection she 
contributed a large number of original songs, adopting the 
signature " B. B." — " Mrs Bogan of Bogan." The music was 
edited by R. A. Smith, and the collection was published at 
Edinburgh under the name of the Scottish Minstrel (1821- 
1824). After her husband's death in 1830 Lady Nairne took 
up her residence at Enniskerry, Co. Wicklow, but she spent 
much time abroad. She died at Gask on the 26th of October 
1845. 

Her songs may be classed under three heads: (1) those 
illustrative of the characters and manners of the old Scottish 
gentry, such as " The Laird o* Cockpen," " The Fife Laird," 
and "John Tod"; (2) Jacobite songs, composed for the most 
part to gratify her kinsman Robertson, the aged chief of Strowan, 
among the best known of which are perhaps " Wha '11 be King 
but Charlie? " " Charlie is my darling," " The Hundred Pipers," 
" He's owre the Hills," and " Bonnie Charlie's noo awa "; 
and (3) songs not included under the above heads, ranging over 
a variety of subjects from " Caller Herrin' " to the " Land o' the 
Leal." For vivacity, genuine pathos and bright wit her songs 
are surpassed only by those of Burns. 

Lady Nairne's husband, William Murray Nairne (1757-1830). 
He was descended from Sir Robert Nairne of Strathord (c. 1620- 
1683), a supporter of Charles II., who was created Baron Nairne 
in 1 68 1. After his death without issue the barony passed to 
his son-in-law, Lord William Murray (c. 1665-1726), the husband 
of his only daughter Margaret (1660-1747) and a younger son 
of John Murray, 1st marquess of Athole. William, who took 
the name of Nairne and became 2nd Baron Nairne, joined the 
standard of the Jacobites in 171 5; he was taken prisoner at the 
battle of Preston and was sentenced to death. He was, however, 
pardoned, but his title was forfeited. His son John (c. 1691- 
1770), who but for this forfeiture would have been the 3rd 
Baron Nairne, was also taken prisoner at Preston, but he was 
soon set at liberty. In the rising of 1745 he was one of the 
Jacobite leaders, being present at the battles of Prestonpans, of 
Falkirk and of Culloden, and consequently he was attainted in 
1746; but escaped to France. His son John (d. 1782) was the 
father of William Murray Nairne, who, being restored to the 
barony of Nairne in 1824, became the 5th baron. The male line 
became extinct when his son William, the 6th baron (1808-1837), 
died unmarried. The next heir was a cousin, Margaret, Baroness 
Keith of Stonehaven Marischal (178S-1867), wife of Auguste 
Charles Joseph, comte de Flahaut de la Billarderie, but she did 
not claim the title. In 1874, however, the right of her daughter, 
the wife of the 4th marquess of Lansdowne, was allowed by the 
House of Lords. 

For Lady Nairne's songs, see Lays from Strathearn, arranged, with 
Symphonies and Accompaniments for the Pianoforte by Finlay Dun 
(1846); vol. i. of the Modern Scottish Minstrel (1857); Life and 
Songs of the Baroness Nairne, with a Memoir and Poems of Caroline 
Oliphant the Younger, edited by Charles Rogers (1869, new ed. 
1886). See also T. L. Kington-Oliphant, Jacobite Lairds of Gask 
(1870). 


NAIRNSHIRE, a north-eastern county of Scotland, bounded 
W. and S. by Inverness-shire, E. by Elginshire and N. by the 
Moray Firth. It has an area of 103,429 acres or 161 -6 sq. m., 
and a coast line of 9 m. and is the fourth smallest county in 
Scotland. The seaboard, which is skirted by sandbanks danger- 
ous to navigation, is lined by low dunes extending into Elginshire. 
Parallel with the coast there is a deposit of sand and gravel 
about 90 ft. high stretching inland for 4 or 5 m. This and the 
undulating plain behind are a continuation westward of the fertile 
Laigh of Moray. From this region southward the land rises 
rapidly to the confines of Inverness-shire, where the chief heights 
occur. Several of these border hills exceed 2000 ft. in altitude, 
the highest being Cam Glas (2162 ft.). The only rivers of 
importance are the Findhorn and the Nairn, both rising in 
Inverness-shire. The Findhorn after it leaves that county 
takes a mainly north-easterly direction down Strathdearn for 
17 m. and enters the sea to the north of Forres in Elginshire 
after a total course of 70 m. The Nairn, shortly after issuing 
from Strathnairn, flows towards the N.E. for 12 m. out of its 
complete course of 38 m. and falls into the Moray Firth at the 
county town. There are eight lochs, all small, but. the loch of 
Clans is of particular interest because of its examples of crannogs, 
or lake-dwellings. Nairnshire contains many beautiful woods and 
much picturesque and romantic scenery. 

Geology. — The county is divided geologically into two clearly- 
marked portions. The southern and larger portion is composed 
of the eastern, Dalradian or younger Highland schists with associated 
granite masses; this forms all the higher ground. The low-lying 
northern part of the country bordering Moray Firth is occupied by 
Old Red Sandstone. The schistose rocks are mainly thin bedded 
micaceous gneisses, schists and tjuartzites; between Dallaschyle 
and Creag an Daimb a more massive higher horizon appears in the 
centre of a synclinal fold. Porphyritic gneiss is found on the flanks 
of Cam nan tri-tighearnan. The schists are frequently intersected 
by dikes of granite, amphibolite, &c. Three masses of granite are 
found penetrating the schists; the largest lies on the eastern 
boundary and extends from about Lethen Bar Hill southward by 
Ardclach and Glenferness to the Bridge of Dulsic. The second 
mass on the opposite side of the county belongs mainly to Inverness 
but the granite reaches into Nairn on the slopes of Bein nan Creagan 
and Ben Buidhe Mhor. A smaller mass near Rait Castle, with large 
pink crystals of orthoclase, has been employed as a building stone. 
On the denuded surface of the schists the Old Red Sandstone was 
deposited and formerly doubtless covered most of the county; 
outlying patches still remain near Drynachan Lodge and near 
Highland Boath in Muckle Burn. The Lower Old Red rocks are 
basal breccias followed by shales with calcareous nodules containing 
fossil fish. The Upper Old Red, which is found usually nearer the 
coast, is unconformable on the Lower series; it consists of red 
shales and clays and obliquely bedded sandstones. Glacial deposits 
are widely spread; they comprise a Lower Boulder Clay, a series 
of gravels and sands, followed by an Upper Boulder Clay, above 
which comes a series of gravel deposits forming ridges on the moor- 
land between the Nairn and Findhorn rivers. A fine kame, resting 
on the plain of sand and gravel, lies between Meikle Kildrummie 
and Loch Flemington, south of the railway. Traces of the old 
marine terraces at 100 ft., 50 ft. and 25 ft. are found near the coast, 
as well as considerable accumulations of blown sand. 

Climate and Industries. — The climate is healthy and equable. 
The temperature for the year averages 47 ° F., for January 38 ° F., 
and for July, 58 F. The mean annual rainfall is 25 in. The soil 
of the alluvial plain, or Laigh, is light and porous and careful cultiva- 
tion has rendered it very fertile; and there is some rich land on the 
Findhorn. Although the most advanced methods of agriculture are 
in use, but a small proportion of the surface is capable of tillage, only 
one-fifth of the whole area being under crops. The hills are mostly 
covered with heath and pasture, suitable for sheep, and cattle are 
kept on the lower lvin^ ground. The county accords many facilities 
for sport. A few distilleries, some sandstone and granite quarries 
and the sea and salmon^ fisheries of the Nairn practically represent 
the industries of the shire, apart from agriculture. The Highland 
Railway from Forres to Inverness crosses the north of the shire. 

Population and Government. — In 1891 the population numbered 
9155 and in 1901 it was 9291, or 57 persons to the sq. m. Besides 
the county town of Nairn (pop. 5089), there are the parishes of 
Ardclach (pop. 772), and Auldearn (pop. of parish 1292, of village 
313). Nairn and Elgin shires combine to return one member to 
parliament, and the county town belongs to the Inverness district 
group of parliamentary burghs (Forres, Fortrose, Inverness and 
Nairn). The shire forms a sheriffdom with Inverness and Elgin 
and a sheriff-substitute sits alternately at Nairn and Elgin. 

History. — The country was originally peopled by the Gaelic 
or northern Picts. Stone circles believed to have been raised 
by them are found at Moyness, Auldearn, Urchany, Ballinrait, 
Dalcross and Croy, the valley of the Nairn being especially rich 
in such relics. To the north of Dulsie Bridge is a monolith 
called the Princess Stone. A greater number of the mysterious 
prehistoric stones with cup-markings occur in Nairn than any- 
where else in Scotland. Mote hills are also common. Whether 
there was any effective Roman occupation of the land so far 
north is an open question, but there is little evidence of it in 
Nairn, beyond the occasional finding of Roman coins. Columba 
and his successors made valiant efforts to Christianize the Picts, 
but it was long before their labours began to tell, although the 
saint's name was preserved late in the 19th century in the annual 
fair at Auldearn called " St Colm's Market," while to his 
biographer Adamnan — corrupted into Evan or Wean — was 
dedicated the church at Cawdor, where an old Celtic bell also 
bears this name. By the dawn of the 10th century the Picts had 
been subdued with the help of the Norsemen, and Nairn, which 
was one of the districts colonized by the Scandinavians, as 
part of the ancient province of Moray, soon afterwards became 
an integral portion of the kingdom of Scotland. Macbeth was 
one of the kings that Moray gave to Scotland, and his name and 
memory survive to the present day. Hardmuir, between Brodie 
and Nairn, is the reputed heath where Macbeth met the witches. 
Territorially Moray was greatly contracted in the reign of David I., 
and thenceforward the history of Nairn merges in the main in 
that of the bishopric and earldom of Moray (see Elgin). The 
thane of Cawdor was constable of the king's castle at Nairn, 
and when the heritable sheriffdom was established towards the 
close of the 14th century this office was also filled by the thane 
of the time. * 

Bibliography. — Charles J. G. Rampini, History of Moray and 
1899). 


NAIROBI, capital of the British East Africa protectorate 
and of the province of Ukamba, 327 m. by rail N.W. of Mombasa 
and 257 m. S.E. of Port Florence on Victoria Nyanza. Pop. 
(1907) 4737, including 350 Europeans and 1752 Indians. Nairobi 
is built on the Athi plains, at the foot of the Kikuyu hills and 
5450 ft. above the sea; it commands magnificent views of 
Kilimanjaro and Mt. Kenya. It is the headquarters of the 
Uganda railway, of the military forces in the protectorate, and 
of the Colonists' Association. It is divided into European, Indian 
and native quarters. Midway between the European and Indian 
quarters stands the town hall. The other public buildings include 
railway works, places of worship (Protestant, Roman Catholic, 
Mahommedan and Hindu) and schools, an Indian bazaar, a 
general hospital and waterworks — the water being obtained 
from springs 13 m. distant. 

The site of Nairobi was selected as the headquarters of the 
Uganda railway, and the first buildings were erected in 1899. 
For some time nearly all its inhabitants were railway officials 
and Indian coolies engaged in the construction of the line. In 
1902 the surrounding highlands were found to be suitable for 
European settlement, and Nairobi speedily grew in importance; 
in 1907 the headquarters of the administration were transferred 
to it from Mombasa. The town is provided with clubs, cricket 
and athletic grounds and a racecourse. 


NAIVASHA, the name of a lake, town and province, in British 
East Africa. The lake, which is roughly circular with a diameter 
of some 13 m., lies at an altitude of 6135 ft. on the crest of the 
highest ridge in the eastern rift-valley between the Kikuyu 
escarpment on the east and the Mau escarpment on the west. 
It is fed from the north by the rivers Gilgal and Morendat, but 
has no known outlet. The rivers, which have a minimum dis- 
charge of 100 cub. ft. per second, run in deep gullies. The water 
of the lake is fresh; the shore in many places is lined with 
papyrus. North and north-west the lake is closed in by the 
volcanic Bum hills; to the south towers the extinct volcano of 
Longonot. Hippopotami and otters frequent the lake, and on an 
island about 1 m. from the shore are large numbers of antelopes 
and other game. Naivasha was discovered in 1883 by Gustav 
Adolf Fischer (1 848-1886), one of the early explorers of the Tana 
and Masai regions, and the first to demonstrate the continuance 
of the rift-valley through equatorial Africa. Fischer was 
followed later in the same year by Joseph Thomson, the Scottish 
explorer. The railway from Mombasa to Victoria Nyanza 
skirts the eastern side of the lake, and on the railway close to 
the lake is built the town of Naivasha, 6230 ft. above the sea, 
391 m. N.W. by rail of Mombasa and 193 m. S.E. by rail of Port 
Florence on Victoria Nyanza. Naivasha province contains 
much land suitable for colonization by white men, and large areas 
were leased to Europeans by the British authorities in 1903 and 
subsequent years. The East Africa Syndicate acquired a lease 
of 500 sq. m. in the valley of the Gilgal and surrounding country 
north of Lake Naivasha. North-west of the lake and along the 
Molo river the 3rd Lord Delamere obtained a grant of 155 
sq. m. 


NAJARA, ISRAEL BEN MOSES, Hebrew poet, was born in 
Damascus and wrote in the latter part of the 16th century (1587- 
1599). He was inspired by the mystical school, and his poems 
are marked by their bold, sensuous images, as well as by a depth 
of feeling unequalled among the Jewish writers of his age. 
He often adapted his verses to Arabic and Turkish melodies. 
To tunes which had been associated with light and even ribald 
themes, Najara wedded words which reveal an intensity of 
religious emotion which often takes a form indistinguishable 
from love poetry. Some pietist contemporaries condemned his 
work for this reason; but this did not prevent many of his 
poems from attaining wide popularity and from winning their 
way into the prayer-book. In fact, Najara could claim the 
authority of the Biblical " Song of Songs " (mystically inter- 
preted) for his combination of the language of human love with 
the expression of the relationship between God and humanity. 

He published during his lifetime a collection of his poems, Songs 
of Israel (Zemiroth Israel), in Safed in 1587; an enlarged edition 
appeared in Venice ( 1 599 -1 6o °) • Others of his poems were published 
at various times, and W. Bacher has described some previously 
unknown poems of Najara (Revue des itudes juives, Nos. 116 sen.). 

(I. A.) 


NAJIBABAD, a town of British India, in the Bijnor district 
of the United Provinces, 31 m. S.E. of Hard war. Pop. (1901) 
19,568. It was founded in the middle of the 18th century by a 
Rohilla chief, and still contains several architectural monuments 
of Rohilla magnificence. It has a station on the Oudh & Rohil- 
khand railway, with a junction for the branch to Kotdwara. 
There is considerable trade in timber, sugar and grain, and 
manufactures of metal-ware, shoes, blankets and cotton cloth. 


NAKHICHEVAN, or Nakhjevan, a city of Russian Armenia, 
in the government of Erivan, 85 m. S.E. of the town of Erivan. 
It occupies the brow of a spur of the Kara-bagh mountains, 
2940 ft. above the sea, and looks out over the valley of the Aras. 
Pop. (1863) 6251, (1897) 8845. Built and rebuilt again and 
again, Nakhichevan is full of half-obliterated evidences of former 
prosperity. The present houses have for the most part been 
quarried from ancient ruins; of the palace of the princes of 
Azerbaijan there remains a gateway with a Persian inscription, 
flanked by two brick towers; and at a little distance stands the 
so-called Tower of the Khans,, a richly decorated twelve-sided 
structure, 102 ft. in circumference and 75 ft. in height, dating, 
to judge by the inscription which runs around the cornice, 
from the 12th century. There are also ruins of a large mosque. 
Situated on the highroad to Tabriz and Teheran, Nakhichevan 
has a large transit trade. In the Persian period the city is said 
to have had 40,000 inhabitants; the population now consists 
chiefly of Tatars and Armenians, who carry on gardening, make 
wine and produce silk, salt and millstones. 

Armenian tradition claims Noah as the founder of Nakhichevan 
(the Naxuana of Ptolemy), and a mound of earth in the city is still 
visited by many pilgrims as his grave. Laid waste by the Persians 
in the 4th century, Nakhichevan sank into comparative insignificance, 
but by the idlh century had recovered its prosperity. In 1064 it 
was taken by Alp Arslan, sultan of the Seljuk Turks, and in the 
13th century it fell a prey to the Mongols of Jenghiz Khan. It 
afterwards suffered frequently during the wars between the Persians, 
Armenians and Turks, and it finally passed into Russian possession 
by the peace of Turkman-chai in 1828, 


NAKHICHEVAN-ON-THE-DON, a town of southern Russia, 
in the Don Cossacks territory, 6 m. by rail N.E. of the town of 
Rostov and on the right bank of the Don. Pop. (1900) 30,883. 
It was founded in 1780 by Armenian immigrants. It soon 
became a wealthy place, and still is the administrative centre of 
the " Armenian district," a narrow strip along the banks of the 
Don, with a population of 27,250. The town has tobacco and • 
wadding factories, tallow-melting works, soap-works, brickworks 
and tanneries. There is a large trade in cereals and timber. 


NAKHON SRI TAM MARAT (also known as Lakhon and 
formerly as Ligore), a town of southern Siam, in the division 
of the same name, about 380 m. S. of Bangkok, on the east 
coast of the Malay Peninsula. It is one of the most ancient cities 
of Siam, and contains many buildings and ruins of antiquarian 
interest. The trade consists chiefly of the export of rice. In the 
bay, a short distance off, ships can lie safely at all seasons. 
The population (7000) is chiefly Siamese, but there is an ad- 
mixture of Burmese, the descendants of prisoners of war and of ' 
refugees from Tenasserim. The town is the headquarters of a 
governor under the high commissioner at Singora. It has for 
long been a centre of the American Presbyterian Mission to Siam. 
It was once the capital of a feudatory state, the chief of which 
ruled the greater part of the Malay Peninsula in the name of the 
kings of Siam and bore the brunt of all the wars with Malacca 
and other Malay states. It lies, however, north of the limit of 
Malay expansion, and has never at any time come under Malay 
rule. With the fall of the Siamese capital of Ayuthia in 1767 
it became independent, but returned to its allegiance on the 
founding of Bangkok. In the 17th century British, Portuguese 
and Dutch merchants had factories here and carried on an 
extensive trade. 


NAKSKOV, a seaport of Denmark, in the ami (county) of 
Maribo, on a wide bay of the Laalands belt at the west end of 
the island of Laaland, 31 m. by rail W. of Nykjobing. Pop. 
(1901) 8310. The church dates from the beginning of the 
15th century. There is a large sugar factory. A great dike, 
extending S.E. to Rodby (20 m.), protects the coast against 
inundation, a serious inroad of the sea having occurred in 1872. 


NAMAQUALAND, a region of south-western Africa, extending 
along the west coast over 600 m. from Damaraland (22 43' 
S.) on the north to 31 S., and stretching inland 80 to 350 m. 
It is divided by the lower course of the Orange river into two 
portions — Little Namaqualand to the south and Great Namaqua- 
land to the north. Little Namaqualand forms part of Cape 
Colony (q.v.) } and Great Namaqualand is the southern portion 
of German South- West Africa (q.v.). The people of Namaqua- 
land are the purest surviving type of Hottentots, and number 
some twenty to thirty thousand. 


NAMASUDRA, the name adopted by the great caste or tribe 
who inhabit the swamps of Eastern Bengal, India, whom the 
higher castes are wont to designate by the opprobrious term of 
Chandal. Their number in 1901 exceeded 2 millions; but if 
the cognate Pods and also the Mahommedans of the same 
ethnical stock were to be added, the total would probably 
reach 11 millions. 


NAME (O. Eng. nama\ cognate forms in Teutonic languages 
are Dutch naam i Ger. Name, &c., but the word is common to all 
Indo-European languages; cf. Gr. 6vofxa f Lat. nomen, Sans. 
naman, &c.), the distinguishing appellation by which a person, 
place, thing or class of persons or things is known. 

Local Names. — The study of names and of their survival in 
civilization enables us in some cases to ascertain what peoples 
inhabited districts now tenanted by races of far different speech. 
Thus the names of mountains and rivers in many parts of England 
are Celtic — for example, to take familiar instances, Usk, Esk 
and Avon. There are also local names (such as Mona, Monmouth, 
Mynwy and others) which seem to be relics of tribes even older 
than the Celtic stocks, and " vestiges of non-Aryan people, 
whom the Celts found in possession both on the Continent and 
in the British Isles." 1 The later English name is sometimes 
the mere translation, perhaps unconscious, of the earlier Celtjc 
appellation, often added to the more ancient word. Penpole 
Point in Somerset is an obvious example of this redoubling of 
names. The pre-Aryan place-names of the Aegean are much 
discussed by philologists. Such a name as Corinthos, with all 
other words in nthos, as hyacinthos, is thought to be pre-Hellenic. 
The river-names Gade, Ver, Test and many other monosyllabic 
river-names in the home counties, appear to be neither English 
nor Celtic, but have been neglected, being known to few but 
anglers and rustics. As to the meaning and nature of ancient 
local names, they are as a rule purely descriptive. A river is 
called by some word which merely signifies " the water "; a 
hill has a name which means no more than " the point," " the 
peak," " the castle." Celtic names are often of a more romantic 
tone, as Ardnamurchan, " the promontory by the great ocean," 
an admirable description of the bold and steep headland which 
breasts the wash of the Atlantic. As a general rule the surviving 
Celtic names, chiefly in Ireland, Wales and Scotland, all contain 
some wide meaning of poetic appropriateness. The English 
names, on the other hand, commonly state some very simple 
fact, and very frequently do no more than denote property, 
such and such a town or hamlet, " ton " or " ham," is the property 
of the Billings, Uffings, Tootings, or whoever the early English 
settlers in the district may have been. The same attachment 
to the idea of property is exhibited in even the local names of 
petty fields in English parishes. Occasionally one finds a bit of 
half-humorous description, as when a sour, starved and weedy 
plot is named " starvacre "; but more usually fields are. known 
as "Thompson's great field," "Smith's small field," "the 
fouracre," or the like. The name of some farmer or peasant 
owner or squatter of ancient date survives for centuries, attached 
to what was once his property. Thus the science of local names 
has a double historical value. The names indicate the various 
races (Celtic, Roman and English in Great Britain) who have 
set in the form of names the seal of their possession on the soil. 
Again, the meanings of the names illustrate the characters of 

	1 Elton, Origins of English History, p. 165; Rhys, Lectures on 
	Celtic Philology, pp. 181, 182. 

the various races. The Romans have left names connected 
with camps (castra, chesters) and military roads; the English 
have used simple descriptions of the baldest kind, or have ex- 
hibited their attachment to the idea of property; the Celtic 
names (like those which the red men have left in America, or 
the blacks in Australia) are musical with poetic fancy, and filled 
with interest in the aspects and the sentiment of nature. The 
British race carries with it the ancient names of an older people 
into every continent, and titles perhaps originally given to places 
in the British Isles by men who had not yet learned to polish 
their weapons of flint may now be found in Australia, America, 
Africa and the islands of the* farthest seas. Local names were 
originally imposed in a handy local manner. The settler or the 
group of cave-men styled the neighbouring river " the water," 
the neighbouring hill " the peak," and these terms often still 
survive in relics of tongues which can only be construed by the 
learned. 

Personal Names. — The history of personal names is longer 
and more complex, but proceeds from beginnings almost as 
simple. But in personal names the complexity of human 
character, and the gradual processes of tangling and disentangling 
the threads of varied human interest, soon come in, and per- 
sonal names are not imposed once and for all. Each man in 
very early societies may have many names, in different char- 
acters and at different periods of his life. The oldest personal 
names which we need examine here are those which indicate, 
not an individual, but a group, held together by the conscious 
sense or less conscious sentiment of kindred, or banded together 
for reasons of convenience. An examination of customs prevalent 
among the most widely separated races of Asia, Africa, Australia 
and America proves that groups conceiving themselves to be 
originally of the same kin are generally styled by the name 
of some animal or other object (animate or inanimate) from 
which they claim descent. This object is known as the " totem " 
(sec Totemism). The groups of supposed kin, however widely 
scattered in local distribution, are known as wolves, bears, 
turtles, suns, moons, cockatoos, reeds and what not, according 
as each group claims descent from this or that stock, and N some- 
times wears a mark representing this or that animal, plant or 
natural object. Unmistakable traces of the same habit of 
naming exist among Semitic and Teutonic races, and even among 
Greeks and Romans. The names chosen are commonly those 
of objects which can be easily drawn in a rude yet recognizable 
way, and easily expressed in the language of gesture. In addition 
to the totem names (which indicate, in each example, supposed 
blood-kindred), local aggregates of men received local names. 
We hear of the " hill-men," " the cave-men," " the bush-men," 
" the coast-men," the " men of the plain," precisely as in the 
old Attic divisions of Aktaioi, Pediaioi and so forth. When a 
tribe comes to recognize its own unity, as a rule it calls itself 
by some term meaning simply " the men," all other tribes being 
regarded as barbarous or inferior. Probably other neighbouring 
tribes also call themselves " the men " in another dialect or 
language, while the people in the neighbourhood are known 
by an opprobrious epithet, as Rakshasas among the early Aryan 
dwellers in India, or Eskimo (raw-eaters) in the far north of the 
American continent. Tribal names in Australia arc often taken 
from the tribal term for " yes " or " no "; cf. Languedoc. 

Leaving social for personal names, we find that, among most 
uncivilized races, a name (derived from some incident or natural 
object) is given at the time of birth by the parents of each new- 
born infant. Occasionally the name is imposed before the child 
is born, and the proud parents call themselves father and mother 
of such an one before the expected infant sees the light. In 
most cases the name (the earliest name) denotes some phenomenon 
of nature; thus Dobrizhofer met in the forests a young man 
styled " Gold flower of day," that is, " Dawn," his father 
having been named " Sun." Similar names are commonly 
given by the natives of Australia, while no names are more 
common among North-American Indians than those derived 
from sun, moon, cloud and wind. 

The names of savage persons are not permanent. The name 
first given is ordinarily changed (at the ceremony answering to 
confirmation in the church) for some more appropriate and. 
descriptive nickname, and that, again, is apt to be superseded 
by various " honour-giving names " derived from various 
exploits. The common superstition against being " named " 
has probably produced the custom by which each individual 
has a secret name and is addressed, when possible, by some 
wide term of kinship — "brother," "father" and the like. 
The bad luck which in Zulu customs as in Vedic myths attends 
the utterance of the real name is evaded by this system of 
addresses. Could we get a savage — an Iroquois, for example — 
to explain his titles, we would find that he is, say, " Morning 
Cloud " (by birth-name), " Hungry Wolf " (by confirmation 
name), " He that raises the white fellow's scalp " (by honour- 
giving name), of the Crane totem (by kinship and hereditary 
name, as understood by ourselves). When society grows so 
permanent that male kinship and paternity are recognized, the 
custom of patronymics is introduced. The totem name gives 
place to a gentile name, itself probably a patronymic in form; 
or, as in Greece, the gentile name gives place to a local name, 
derived from the deme. Thus a Roman is called Caius; Julius 
is his gentile name (of the Julian clan); Caesar is a kind of 
hereditary nickname. A Greek is Thucydides (the name usually 
derived from the grandfather), the son of Olorus, of the deme 
of Halimusia. 

This system of names answered the purposes of Greek and 
Roman civilization. In Europe, among the Teutonic races, the 
stock-names (conceivably totemistic in origin) survive in English 
local names, which speak of the " ton " or " ham " of the Billings 
or Tootings. An examination of these names, as collected in 
Kemble's Anglo-Saxons, proves that they were frequently derived 
from animals and plants. Such English names as " Noble 
Wolf " (Ethelwulf), " Wolf of War " and so forth, certainly 
testify to a somewhat primitive and fierce stage of society. 
Then came more vulgar nicknames and personal descriptions, 
as " Long," " Brown," " White " and so forth. Other names 
are directly derived from the occupation or craft (Smith, Fowler, 
Sadler) of the man to whom they were given, and yet other 
names were derived from places. The noble and landowner was 
called " of " such and such a place (the German von and French 
de). while the humbler man was called not " of " but " at " 
such a place, as in the name " Attewell," or merely by the local 
name without the particle. The " de " might also indicate 
merely the place of a person's birth or residence; it was not a 
proof of noblesse. If we add to these names patronymics formed 
by the addition of " son," and terms derived from Biblical 
characters (the latter adopted after the Reformation as a re- 
action against the names of saints in the calendar), we have 
almost exhausted the sources of modern English and European 
names. A continual development of custom can be traced, and 
the analysis of any man's family and Christian names will lead 
us beyond history into the manners of races devoid of literary 
records. (A. L.) 

Greek Names. — The Greeks had only one, and no family, name; 
hence the name of a child was left to the discretion of the parents. 
The eldest son generally took the name of his paternal grand- 
father, girls that of their grandmother. Genuine patronymics 
(Phocion, son of Phocus), analogous compounds (Theophrastus, 
son of Theodorus), or names of similar meaning (Philumenus, 
son of Eros) also occur. Athenaeus divides names generally into 
(i) 0eo<£6pa, chiefly derivatives or compounds of the names of 
gods (Demetrius, Apollonius, Theodorus, Diodotus, Heraclitus, 
Diogenes); (2) &0ea, simple or variously compounded names, 
especially such as were of good omen for a son's future career 
(Aristides, Pericles, Sophocles, Alexander), although such hopes 
were frequently belied by the results. Instances of a subsequent 
change of name are not uncommon; thus, Plato and Theo- 
phrastus were originally Aristocles and Tyrtamus. 

To obviate the ambiguity and confusion arising from the use 
of a single name, various expedients were adopted, the commonest 
being to add the father's name — ArjfxoaOevrjs ArjfiocOkvovs, 
'AXki^io&js 6 Kkeiviov. Sometimes the birthplace was added — 

*llp65oros 'AXiicapvatjtjevs, OovKv8i5r)$ 6 'Afrqvaios, and some- 
times the name of the deme (see Cleisthenes), e.g. A^/ttoo-^ei^v 
Uaiavevs, Nicknames denoting mental or bodily defects 
or striking peculiarities (e.g. colour of hair) were also favourite 
methods of discrimination (e.g. £av66s, yellow). 

Roman Names. — Towards the end of the republic free-born 
Romans were distinguished by three names and two (or even four) 
secondary indications. In an inscription the name of Cicero is 
given in the following form: M. Tullius M.f. M.n. M.pr. Cor(nelia 
tribu) Cicero. M (=Marcus) is the praenomen; Tullius, the 
nomen, the gentile or family name; Cicero, the cognomen. 
This order, always preserved, is the correct one. M.f. ( = Marci 
filius), M.n. (= Marci nepos), M.pr. ( = Marci pronepos),Cor(nelia 
tribu) are only used in formal description. 

Praenomen (corresponding to the modern Christian name). — 
Varro gives a list of 32 praenomina^ of which 14 had fallen out of use 
in Sulla's time, the remaining 18 being confined to patrician families, 
Some of these appear to nave been appropriated by particular 
families, e.g. Appius by the Claudii, Mamercus by the Aemilii. In 
the case of plebeian families there was greater latitude and a larger 
variety of names, but those which became ennobled followed the 
patrician usage. After the time of Sulla some of the old praenomina 
were revived, unless they are rather to be regarded as cognomina, 
which in some families displaced the praenomen proper, as in the case 
of a certain Africanus Aemilius Regulus. " 

The nomen (gentile, gentilicium) belonged to all the individual 
members of the gens and those in any way connected with it (wives, 
clients, freedmen). In patrician gentes the nomina nearly all ended in 
-ius (~aeus t ~eius t -eus), and are perhaps a sort of patronymic (Iulius 
from lulus). In some cases the name indicates the place of origin 
(Norbanus, Acerranus); -acus (Divitiacus) is peculiar to Gallic, 
~na (Caecina, Perperna) to Etruscan, -enus (Arulenus) to Umbrian 
names. Verres as a gentile name stands by itself; perhaps it was 
originally a cognomen. 

The cognomen ("surname") was the name given to a Roman 
citizen as a member of a famUia or branch of the gens t whereby the 
family was distinguished from other families belonging to the same 
gens. Cognomina were either of local origin (Calatinus, Sabinus) ; or 
denoted physical peculiarities or moral characteristics (Crassus, 
Longus, Lentulus, Lepidus, Calvus, Naso); or they were really 
praenomina (Cossus, Agrippa) or derivatives from praenomina or 
cogMww*wa(Sextinus,Corvinus,Laevinus). The tria nomina (" three 
names ") in the well-known passage of* Juvenal (v. 127) was 
probably a^t that time a mark of tngenuitas rather than of nobilitas. 

In addition to these three regular names, many Romans had a 
fourth, cognomen secundum (agnomen was an introduction of the 
grammarians of the 4th century). These " second surnames " were 
chiefly bestowed in recognition of great achievements— Asiaticus, 
Africanus, Creticus, or were part of the terminology in cases of 
adoption. ' 

Persons adopted took all thethree names of their adoptive father, 
but at the same time, to keep his origin in mind, they added a second 
cognomen t a derivative in -anus or -inus from his old gentile name ; 
thus, Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus, son of Lucius Aemilius 
Paullus, adopted by Publius Cornelius Scipio. After the time of 
Sulla, the derivative was no longer used, one of the old names being 
substituted without change — Marcus Terentius Varro ' Lucullus. 
Under the empire no fixed rule was observed, the most remarkable 
thing being the very large number of names borne by one person (as 
many as 36 occur on an inscription). Especially in the army and 
amongst the lower orders, nicknames (signa t vocabula) are of frequent 
occurrence. Well-known examples are: Caligula; cedo alteram 
(" another stick, please! "), given to a centurion of flogging pro- 
pensities; manus ad ferrum ( hand on sword,") of Aurelian when 
tribune. v 

Women originally took the name of the head of the family — 
Caecilia (filia) Metelli, Metella Crassi (uxor). Later, f. (=*filia) was 
added after the name of a daughter. Towards the end of the republic 
women are denoted by their gentile name alone,"* while under the 
empirethey always have two — the nomen and cognomen of the father 
(Aemilia Lepida, daughter of Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus), or 
the nomen of both father and mother (Valeria Attia, daughter of 
Attius Atticus and Valeria Sextina). 

Slaves originally had no name, but simply took their master's 
praenomen in the genitive followed by -por ( = puer): Marcipor, 
Publipor, Quintipor. Later, when the number of slaves was largely 
increased, by way of distinction names similar to those common in 
Greece (national, physical or moral qualities) or simply foreign names 
were given them. The word puer was subsequently replaced by 
servus and the form of the name ran: Aphrodisius Ploti Gai servus; 
under the empire, Eleutherus C. Julii Florentini (the natural order 
being preserved in the master's name). When a slave exchanged 
one master for another, he adopted the name of his old master in an 
adjectival form in -anus: Cissus Caesaris (servus) Maecenatianus 
(formerly a slave of Maecenas). Freedmen used their own name as 
a cognomen and took the nomen of him who gave them their freedom 
and any praenomen they pleased: L. Livius Andronicus, freedman 
of M. Livius Salinator. In the time of Caesar, the freedman took the 
praenomen of the patronus and the gentile name of one of the friends 
of the latter; thus, Cicero calls his slave Dionysius M. Pomponius 
Dionysius as a token of friendship for T, Pomponius Atticus. 

Q. H. F.) 

Law. — The Christian name, i.e. the name given to a person on 
admission to baptism into the Christian church, dates back to the 
early history of the Church. It has been said that the practice 
of giving a name on baptism was possibly imitated from the 
Jewish custom of giving a personal name at circumcision. In 
England individuals were for long distinguished by Christian 
names only, and the surname (see below) or family name is still 
totally ignored by the Church. As population increased and 
intercourse became general, it became necessary to employ some 
further name by which one man might be known from another, 
and in process of time the use of surnames became universal, the 
only exceptions in England being the members of the royal 
family, who sign by their baptismal names only. 

Where the ecclesiastical law does not come into conflict with the 
common law or has not been changed by it, it still prevails, and 
therefore it may be said that the name given at baptism may be 
regarded as practically unalterable. But that a baptismal. name is 
not altogether unalterable has been a matter of contention. A 
constitution of Archbishop Peckham (ob. 1292) directs that" ministers 
shall take care not to permit wanton names to be given to children 
baptized^ and if otherwise it be done, the same shall be changed 
by the bishop at confirmation." And before the Reformation the 
Office for Confirmation must have contemplated the possibility of 
such a change, as the bishop is directed therein to ask the child's 
name before anointing him with the chrism, and afterwards, naming 
him, to sign him with the cross. But in the second and subsequent 
Prayer-books all mention of the name in the Office for Confirmation 
is omitted. Lord Coke was of opinion that such a change was 
permissible and gives examples (i^ Inst, p.^ 3), but Dr Burn (Ecc. 
Law, i. 80) held a contrary opinion. Phillimore, however, gives 
several instances when such a change was made, one, in the diocese 
of Liverpool, on the nth of June 1886 (see Phillimore, Ecc. Law, 
i. 517, 518; and also Notes and Queries, 4th ser. vol. vi. p. 17, 7th 
ser. vol. ii. p. 17). In the case of those who have not been baptized, but 
have a name (other than a surname) given them by their parents, 
such a name acquires force only by repute. The Registration of 
Births^ Act, which requires the registration of every^ birth, makes 
provision for the insertion of a name, but such provision is purely 
permissive, and the^ only object of entering a name on the register 
is to have an authoritative record of the commencement of repute. 

A clergyman of the Church of England is compelled to perform the 
ceremony of baptism when required by a parishioner, and to give 
whatever name or names the godparents select, but although the 
rubrics do not expressly say so, he can object to any name on religious 
or moral grounds. _ 

The freedom enjoyed in England and the United States as to the 
kind of Christian name which may be given to a child is somewhat 
limited in France and Germany. In France, by a decree of the # 11 
Germinal, an XI., the only names permitted to be recorded in the civil 
register as Christian names (prenoms) of children were those of 
saints in the calendar and the names of personages known in ancient 
history. Even at the present day an official list is issued (revised 
from time to time) containing a selection of forenames, and no 
name of a child will be registered unless it occurs in this list. A 
limitation more or less similar prevails in Germany and other 
European countries. 

As regards the surname (Fr. surnom, name in addition), custom 
has universally decreed that a man shall be known by the name 
of his father. But in England and the United States, at least, this 
custom is not legally binding; there is no law preventing a man 
from taking whatever name he has a fancy for, nor are there any 
particular Formalities required to be observed on adopting a fresh 
surname; but, on the other hand, if a man has been known for a 
considerable time by the name of his father, or by a name of repute, 
and he changes it for another, he cannot compel others to address 
him or designate him by the new one. Neither does the English 
law recognize the absolute right of any person in any particular name 
to the extent of preventing another person from assuming it (Du 
Boulay v. Du Boulay, 1869, L.R. 2 P.C. 430). If, however, a person 
adopts a new name and wishes to have it publicly notified and recog- 
nized in official circles, the method of procedure usually adopted 
is that by royal licence. This is by petition, prepared and presented 
through the Heralds' Office. If granted, the royal licence is given 
under the sign manual and privy seal of the sovereign, counter- 
signed by the home secretary. In wills and settlements a clause is 
often inserted whereby a testator or settler imposes upon the takers 
of the estate an obligation to assume his name and bear his arms. 
The stamp duty payable for a royal licence in this case is fifty 
pounds, but if the application is merely voluntary the stamp duty 
is ten pounds. Where there is a more formal adoption of a surname, 
it is usual, for purposes of publicity and evidence, to advertise the 
change of name in the newspapers and to execute a deed poll setting 
out the change, and enrol the same in the central office of the Supreme 
Court. 

Both in France and Germany official authorization must be ob- 
tained for any change of name. By the German Code 1900 (s. 12) 
if the right to a new name is disputed by another or his interest is 
injured thereby, the person entitled can compel the abandonment 
of the new name. 

In England, a wife on marriage adopts the surname of her husband, 
disregarding entirely her maiden surname; in Scotland the practice 
usually is for the wife to retain her maiden name for all legal purposes, 
adding the name of her husband as an alias. On remarriage the rule 
is for the wife to adopt the name of the new husband, but an ex- 
ception to this is tacitly recognized in the case of a title acquired by 
marriage when the holder remarries a commoner. This exception 
was very fully discussed in Cowley v. Cowley, 190 1, A.C. 450. 

Peers of the United Kingdom when signing their names use only 
their surnames or peerage designations. It is merely a privileged 
custom, which does not go back further than the Stuart period. 
Peeresses sign by their Christian names or initials followed by their 
peerage designation. Bishops sign by their initials followed by 
the name of the see. In Scotland it is very usual for landowners 
to affix to their names the designation of their lands, and this was 
expressly sanctioned by an act of 1672. 

See Ency. Eng. Law, tits. "Christian Name," "Surname"; 
W. P. W. Phillimore, Law and Practice of Change of Name; Fox- 
Davies and Carlyon-Britton, Law concerning Names and Changes of 
Name. (T. A. I.) 


NAMUR, one of the nine provinces of Belgium. It lies between 
Hainaut on the one side and Liege and Luxemburg on the other, 
and extends from Brabant up the Meuse valley to the French 
frontier. Area, 1414 sq. m.; pop. (1904) 357,759. The part 
north of the Meuse is very fertile, but the rest is covered with 
forest and is little suited for agriculture. There are a few iron 
and coal-mines between the Sambre and Meuse, and the quarries 
are of great importance. Arboriculture, and especially fruit-tree 
plantation, is on the increase. The province is divided into 
the three arrondissements of Namur, Dinant and Philippeville, 
and there are fifteen cantons for judicial purposes. 


NAMUR (Flemish, Namen), a town of Belgium, capital of 
the province of Namur. Pop. (1904) 31,940. It is most pictur- 
esquely situated at the junction of the rivers Sambre and Meuse, 
the town lying on the left banks of the two rivers, while the rocky 
promontory forming the fork between them is crowned with the 
old citadel. This citadel is no longer used for military purposes, 
and the hill on which it stands has been converted into a public 
park, while the crest is occupied by an enormous hotel to which 
access is gained by a cogwheel railway. Namur is connected 
with the citadel by two bridges across the Sambre, and from the 
east side of the promontory there is a fine stone bridge to the 
suburb of Jambes. This bridge was constructed in the nth 
century and rebuilt in the reign of Charles V. It is the only old 
bridge in existence over the Meuse in the Belgian portion of its 
course. The cathedral of St Aubain or Albin was built in the 
middle of the 18th century. The church of St Loup is a century 
older, and is noticeable for its columns of red marble from the 
quarry at St Remy near Rochefort. There is a considerable local 
industry in cutlery, and there are numerous tanneries along the 
river-side. 

The hill of the citadel is perhaps identical with Aduaticum, 
the fortified camp of the Aduatici captured and destroyed by 
Julius Caesar after the defeat of the Nervii, although many 
authorities incline to the plateau of Hast6don, north of the 
Sambre and of Namur itself, as the more probable site of the 
Belgic position. Many antiquities of the Roman-Gallic period 
have been discovered in the neighbourhood and are preserved 
in the local archaeological museum. Here also are deposited the 
human fossils of the Stone Age discovered at Furfooz on the Lesse. 
In the feudal period Namur was always a place of some import- 
ance, and long formed a marquisate in the Courtenay family. 
One institution of the medieval period came down to modern 
times, and was only discontinued in consequence of the fatalities 
with which it was generally accompanied. This was the annual 
encounter on the Place d'Armes of rival parties mounted on 
stilts. Galliot, the historian of Namur, says the origin of these 
jousts is lost in antiquity, but considers the use of stilts was due 
to the frequency with which the town was flooded before the 
rivers were embanked. Don John of Austria made Namur his 
headquarters during the greater part of his stay in the Nether- 
lands, and died here in 1578. As -a fortress Namur did not 
attain the first rank until after its capture by Louis XIV. in 
1692, when Vauban endeavoured to make it impregnable; but 
it was retaken by William III, in 1695. The French recaptured 
it in 1 702 and retained possession for ten years. In 1 8 1 5 Marshal 
Grouchy on his retreat into France fought an action here with 
the Prussians under General Pirch. In 1888, under the new 
scheme of Belgian defence, the citadel and its detached works 
were abandoned, and in their place nine outlying forts were 
constructed at a distance of from 3 to 5 m. round the town. 
All these forts are placed on elevated points. They are in their 
order, beginning on the left bank of the Meuse and ending on 
the right bank of the same river: (1) St Heribert, (2) Malonne, 
(3) Suarlee, (4) Emines, (5) Cognclee, (6) Gelbressee, (7) Maizeret, 
(8) Andoy and (9) Dave. The whole position is correctly de- 
scribed as the " t£te de pont " of Namur, and in addition to its 
strong bomb-proof forts it possesses great natural advantages for 
the defence of the intervals. 


NANA FARNA VIS (1 741-1800), the great Mahratta minister 
at Poona at the end of the 18th century. His real name was 
Balaji Janardhan Bhanu; but, like many other Mahrattas, he 
was always known by a kind of nickname. Nana properly means 
a maternal grandfather; Farnavis is the official title of the 
finance minister, derived from fard— an account and navis — 
a writer. He was born at Satara on the 4th of May 1741, and 
was the son of a Chitpavan Brahman, of the same class as the 
Peshwa, who held the hereditary office of Farnavis.' He escaped 
from the fatal battle of Panipat in 1761; and from about 1774 
was the leading personage in directing the affairs of the Mahratta 
confederacy, though never a soldier. This was the period when 
Peshwas rapidly succeeded one another, and there was more 
than one disputed succession. It was the policy of Nana Farnavis 
to hold together the confederacy against both internal dissensions 
and the growing power of the British. He died at Poona on 
the 13th of March 1800, just before the Peshwa placed himself 
in the hanJs of the British and thus broke up the Mahratta 
confederacy. In an extant letter to the Peshwa, the Marquess 
Wellesley thus describes him: " The able minister of your state, 
whose upright principles and honourable views and whose zeal 
for the welfare and prosperity both of the dominions of his own 
immediate superiors and of other powers were so justly cele- 
brated." 

See Captain A. Macdonald, Memoir of Nana Furnuwees (Bombay, 
1851). 


NANAIMO, a city of British Columbia, on the east coast of 
Vancouver Island. Pop. (1906) about 6500. It is connected 
with Victoria by the Esquimalt and Nanaimo railway, and has 
a daily steamer service to Vancouver, as well as to Comox, 
Sydney and other points on the coast. It is favourably situated 
for growing fruit, and mixed farming is carried on to a consider- 
able extent. There is a large export trade in coal from the 
neighbouring mines, which is sent chiefly to San Francisco. 


NANA SAHIB, the common designation of Dandu Panth, an 
adopted son of the ex-peshwa of the Mahrattas, Baji Rao, 
who took a leading part in the great Indian Mutiny, and was 
proclaimed peshwa by the mutineers. Nana Sahib had a griev- 
ance against the British government because they refused to 
continue to him the pension of eight lakhs of rupees (£80,000) 
which was promised to Baji Rao by Sir John Malcolm on his 
surrender in 1818. This pension, however, was only intended 
to be a life grant to Baji Rao himself. For this refusal the Nana 
bore the British a lifelong grudge, which he washed out in the 
blood of women and children in the massacres at Cawnpore. 
In 1859, when the remnants of the rebels disappeared into 
Nepal, the Nana was among the fugitives. His death was reported 
some time afterwards, but his real fate remains obscure. 


NANCY, a town of north-eastern France, the capital formerly 
of the province of Lorraine, and now of the department of 
Meurthe-et-Moselle, 219 m. E. of Paris on the railway to Strass- 
burg. Pop. (1906), town, 98,302; commune (including troops), 
110,570. Nancy is situated on the left bank of the Meurthe 
6 m. above its junction with the Moselle and on the Marne- 
Rhine canal. The railway from Paris to Strassburg skirts the 
city on the south-west side; other railways — to Metz, to fipinal 
by Mirecourt, to Chateau Salins — join the main fine near Nancy, 
and make it an important junction. The town consists of two 
portions — the Ville-Vieille in the north-west between the Cours 
Leopold and the Pepiniere gardens, with narrow and winding 
streets, and the Ville-Neuve in the south-east with wide straight 
streets, allowing views of the hills around the city. Between the 
two lies, the Place Stanislas, a square worthy of a capital city: 
in the centre stands the statue of Stanislas Leczinski, ruler of 
Lorraine, and on all sides rise imposing buildings in the 18th- 
century style — the town hall, episcopal palace, theatre, &c. 
A fine triumphal arch erected by Stanislas in honour of Louis XV. 
leads from the Place Stanislas to the Place Carriere, which forms 
a beautiful tree-planted promenade, containing at its further end 
the government palace (1760) now the residence of the general 
commanding the XX, army corps, and adjoins the so-called 
Pepiniere (nursery) established by Stanislas. Other open spaces 
in the city are the Place d'Alliance^ (formed by Stanislas, with 
a fountain 'in memory of the alliance between Louis XV. 
and Maria Theresa in 1756), the Place de PAcademie, 
the Place St Epvre with a statue of Duke Ren6 II. , the 
Place Dombasle and the Place de Thiers, the two latter 
embellished with the statues of Mathieu Dombasle, the agri- 
culturist, and Adolphe Thiers. The cathedral in the Ville- 
Neuve, built in the 18th century, has a wide facade flanked by 
two dome-surmounted towers, and a somewhat frigid and sombre 
interior. Of particular interest is the church of the Cordeliers, in 
the old town, built by Rene II. about 1482 to commemorate his 
victory over Charles the Bold. Pillaged during the Revolution 
period, but restored to religious uses in 1825, it contains the 
tombs of Antony of Vaudemont and his wife Marie d'Harcourt, 
Philippe of Gueldres, second wife of Rene II., Henry III., count 
of Vaudemont, and Isabella of Lorraine his wife, Rene II. (a 
curious monument raised by his widow in 1515) and Cardinal 
de Vaudemont (d. 1587). Here also is a chapel built at the 
beginning of the 1 7th century to receive the tombs of the princes 
of the house of Lorraine. The church of St Epvre, rebuilt 
between 1864 and 1874 on the site of an old church of the 13th, 
14th and 15th centuries, has a fine spire and belfry and good 
stained glass windows. Bonsecours Church, at the end of the 
St Pierre Faubourg, contains the mausoleums of Stanislas (by 
whom it was built) and his wife Catherine, and the heart of their 
daughter Marie, queen of France, as well as the statue of Notre- 
Dame de Bonsecours, the object of a well-known pilgrimage. 
Of the old ducal palace, begun in the 15th century by Duke 
Raoul and completed by Ren6 II., there remains but a single wing, 
partly rebuilt after a fire in 1871. The entrance to this wing, 
which contains the archaeological museum of Lorraine, is a 
beautiful specimen of the late Gothic of the beginning of the 
1 6th century. One of the greatest treasures of the collection is 
the tapestry found in the tent of Charles the Bold after the 
battle of Nancy. Of the old gates of Nancy the most ancient 
and remarkable is the Porte de la Craffe (1463). The town hall 
contains a museum of painting and sculpture, and there is a rich 
municipal library. A monument to President Carnot, and 
statues of Jacques Callot, the engraver, and of General Drouot, 
both natives of Nancy, and of Claude Gellee stand in various 
parts of the town. 

Nancy is the seat of a bishop, a prefect, a court of appeal and 
a court of assizes, headquarters of the XX. army corps, and centre 
of an acadhnie (educational division) with a university comprising 
faculties of law, medicine, science and letters, and a higher school 
of pharmacy. There are also tribunals of first instance and of 
commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, lycees and training 
colleges for both sexes, a higher ecclesiastical seminary, a school 
of agriculture, the national school of forestry, a higher school 
of commerce, a technical school {tcole professionndle), a school of 
arts and crafts (icole prtparaloire des arts et metiers), a chamber 
of commerce and a branch of the Bank of France. The industries 
of Nancy include printing, brewing, cotton- and wool-spinning 
and the weaving of cotton and woollen goods, and the manufacture 
of tobacco (by the State), of boots and shoes, straw hats, pottery, 
casks, embroidery, machinery, engineering material, farm im- 
plements and iron goods. 

At the close of. the nth century Odelric of Nancy, brother 
of Gerard of Alsace, possessed at Nancy a castle which enabled 
him to defy the united assaults of the bishops of Metz and Treves 
and the count of Bar. In the 12th century the town was sur- 
rounded with walls, and became the capital of the dukes of 
Lorraine; but its real importance dates from the 15th century, 
when on the 5th cf January 1477 Charles the Bold was defeated 
by Rene II. and perished at its gates. 1 Enlarged, embellished 
and admirably refortified by Charles III., it was taken by the 
French in 1633 (Louis XIII. and Richelieu being present at the 
siege). After the peace of Ryswick in 1697 it was restored and 
Duke Leopold set himself to repair the disasters of the past. 
He founded academies, established manufactures and set 
about the construction of the new town. But it was reserved 
for Stanislas Leczinski, to whom Lorraine and Bar were assigned 
in 1 736, to carry out the plans of improvement in a style which 
made Nancy one of the palatial cities of Europe, and rendered 
himself the most popular as he was the last of the dukes of 
Lorraine. The city, which became French in 1766, was occupied 
by the allies in 1814 and 181 5, and put to ransom by the Prussians 
in 1870. After the Franco-German war the population was 
greatly increased by the immigration of Alsatians and of people 
from Metz and its district. 

See C. Pfister, Htstoire de Nancy (Paris and Nancy, 1902) ; J. Cayon, 
Histoire physique, civile, morale et politique de Nancy (Nancy, 1846). 


NANDAIR, or Nander, a town of India, in the state of 
Hyderabad, on the left bank of the Godaveri, with a station 
on the Hyderabad-Godaveri valley railway, 174 m. N.E. of 
Hyderabad city. Pop. (1901) 14,184. It is a centre of local 
trade, with a special industry of j&ne muslin and gold bordered 
scarves. As the scene of the murder of Guru Govind, it contains 
a shrine visited by Sikhs from all parts of India. 


NANDGAON, a feudatory state of India, in the Chhattisgarh 
division of the Central Provinces. Area, 871 sq. m.; pop. 
(1901) 126,356, showing a decrease of 31% in the decade, due 
to famine; estimated revenue £23,000; tribute £4600. The 
state has a peculiar history. Its foundation is traced to a religious 
celibate, who came from the Punjab towards the end of the 18th 
century. From the founder it passed through a succession of 
chosen disciples until 1879, when the British government 
recognized the ruler as an hereditary chief and afterwards 
conferred upon his son the title of Raja Bahadur. The state 
has long been well administered, and has derived additional 
prosperity from the construction of the Bengal-Nagpur railway, 
which has a station at Raj-Nandgaon, the capital (pop. 11,094). 
Here there is a steam cotton mill. 


NANDI, an East African tribe of mixed Nilotic, Bantu and 
Hamitic origin. With them are more or less closely allied the 
Lumbwa (correctly Kipsikis), Buret (or Puret) and Sotik 
(Soot) tribes, as well as the Elgonyi (properly Kony) of Mount 
Elgon. They have also affinities with the Masai tribes. The 
Nandi-Lumbwa peoples inhabit the country stretching south 
from Mount Elgon to about i° S. and bounded east by the escarp- 
ment of the eastern rift -valley and west by the territory of the 
tribes, such as the Kavirondo, dwelling round the Victoria 
Nyanza. They have given their name to the Nandi plateau. 
The Hamitic strain in these allied tribes is derived from the Galla; 
they also exhibit Pygmy elements. Their original home was 
in the north, and they probably did not reach their present home 
until the beginning of the 1 9th century. They differ considerably 

1 The battle raged in the district to the S., E. and N. of the town, 
the operations extending from St Nicolas du Port (S.) to the bridge 
of Bouxieres (N.). The chief struggle took place on the banks of the 
stream of Bon Secours, which now runs entirely underground, 
flowing from the S.W. into the Meurthe. Much of the battlefield is 
now covered by modern buildings, but S.W. of the town a cross 
marks the spot where the body of Charles the Bold was discovered. 

	xix. 6 

in physical appearance; some resemble the Masai, being men 
of tall stature with features almost Caucasian, other are dwarfish 
with markedly negro features. Like the Masai, Turkana and 
Suk, the Nandi-Lumbwa tribes were originally nomadic, but they 
have become agriculturists. They own large herds of cattle. 
They have a double administrative system, the chief medicine 
man or Orkoiyot being supreme chief and regulating war affairs, 
while representatives of the people, called Kiruogik, manage 
the ordinary affairs of the tribe. The medicine men are of 
Masai origin and the office is hereditary. The young men form 
a separate warrior class to whom is entrusted the care of the 
country. A period of about 7! years is spent in this class, and 
the ceremony of handing over the country from one " age " 
to the succeeding " age " is of great importance. The arms of 
the warriors are a stabbing spear, shield, sword and club. Many 
also possess rifles. All the Nandi are divided into clans, each 
having its sacred animal or totem. They have no towns, each 
family living on the land it cultivates. The huts are of circular 
pattern. The Nandi believe in a supreme deity — Asis — who 
takes a benevolent interest in their welfare, and to whom 
prayers are addressed daily. They also worship ancestors and 
consider earthquakes to be caused by the spirits moving in the 
underworld. They practise circumcision, and girls undergo 
a similar operation. Spitting is a sign of blessing. Their scanty 
clothing consists chiefly of dressed skins. The tribal mark is 
a small hole bored in the upper part of the ear. Their language 
is Nilotic and in general construction resembles the Masai. 
It has been slightly influenced by the Somali tongue. The 
primitive hunting tribe known as the Wandorobo speak a 
dialect closely resembling Nandi. 

The Nandi at one time appear to have been subject to the 
Masai, but when the country was first known to Europeans 
they were independent and occupied the plateau which bears 
their name. Hardy mountaineers and skilful warriors, they 
closed their territory to all who did not get special permission, 
and thus blocked the road from Mombasa to Uganda alike to 
Arab and Swahili. Caravans that escaped the Masai frequently 
fell victims to the Nandi, who were adepts at luring them to 
destruction. When the railway to the Victoria Nyanza was 
built it had to cross the Nandi country. The tribesmen, who 
had already shown hostility to the whites, attacked both the 
railway and the telegraph line and raided other tribes. Eventually 
(1 905-1 906) the NancU were removed by the British to reserves 
somewhat north of the railway zone (sec British East Africa). 
The Lumbwa reserve lies south of the railway, and farther south 
still are the reserves of the Buret and Sotik. 

See A. C. Hollis >f The Nandi: Their Language and Folk-lore, with 
introduction by Sir Charles Eliot (Oxford, 1909), and the works 
there cited. 


NANDIDRUG, a hill fortress of southern India, in the Kolar 
district of Mysore, 4851 ft. above the sea. It was traditionally 
held impregnable) and its storming by Lord Cornwallis in 1791 
was one of the most notable incidents of the first war against 
Tippoo Sultan. It was formerly a favourite resort for British 
officials during the hot season. 


NANGA, the most primitive form of the ancient Egyptian 
harp. The nanga consisted of a boat-shaped or vaulted body of 
wood, the back of which was divided down the centre by a sound 
bar built into the back; on this bar was fixed a cylindrical stick 
round which one end of the strings was wound, the soundboard 
or parchment being stretched over the back without interfering 
with the stick. The other end of the strings was fastened to pegs 
set in the side of a curved neck, so that the strings did not lie 
directly over the soundboard. There were but 3 or 4 strings, one 
note only being obtained from each. Some of these nangas are 
to be seen at the British Museum. 


NANKEEN, a cotton cloth originally made in China, and now 
imitated in various countries. The name is derived from 
Nanking, the city in which the cloth is said to have been originally 
manufactured. The characteristic yellowish colour of nankeen 
is attributed to the peculiar colour of the cotton from which it 
was originally made. 


NANKING (" the southern capital "), the name by which 
Kiang-ning, the chief city in the province of Kiangsu, China, has 
been known for several centuries. Pop. about 140,000. The 
city stands in 32 5' N., 118 47' E., nearly equidistant between 
Canton and Peking, on the south bank of the Yangtsze Kiang. 
It dates only from the beginning of the Ming dynasty (1368), 
although it is built on the site of a city which for more than two 
thousand years figured under various names in the history of the 
empire. The more ancient city was originally known as Kin-ling; 
under the Han dynasty (206 B.C. to a.d. 25) its name was con- 
verted into Tan-yang; by the T'ang emperors (a.d. 618-907) 
it was styled Kiang-nan and Sbeng Chow; by the first sovereign 
of the Ming dynasty (a.d. 1368-1644) it was created the " southern 
capital " (Nan-king), and was given the distinctive name of 
Ying-t'ien; and since the accession to power of the present 
Manchu rulers it has been officially known as Kiang-ning, 
though still popularly called Nan-king. It was the seat of the 
imperial court only during the reigns of the first two emperors of 
the Ming dynasty, and was deserted for Shun-t'ien (Peking) by 
Yung-lo, the third sovereign of that line, who in 1403 captured 
the town and usurped the crown of his nephew, the reigning 
emperor. 

The T'aip'ing rebels, who carried the town by assault in 
1853, swept away all the national monuments and most of the 
more conspicuous public buildings it contained, and destroyed the 
greater part of the magnificent wall which surrounded it. This 
wall is said by Chinese topographers to have been 96 li, or 32 m., 
in circumference. This computation has, however, been shown 
to be a gross exaggeration, and it is probable that 60 li, or 20 m., 
would be nearer the actual dimensions. The wall, of which only 
small portions remain, was about 70 ft. in height, measured 30 ft. 
in thickness at the base, and was pierced by thirteen gates. 
Encircling the north, east, and south sides of the city proper was a 
second wall which enclosed about double the space of the inner 
enclosure. In the north-east corner of the town stood the 
imperial palace reared by Hung-wu, the imperial founder of the 
modern city. After suffering mutilation at the overthrow of the 
Ming dynasty, this magnificent building was burnt to the ground 
on the recapture of the city from the T'aip'ing rebels in 1864. 
But beyond comparison the most conspicuous public building at 
Nanking was the famous porcelain tower, which was designed 
by the emperor Yung-lo (1403-14 28) to commemorate the 
virtues of his mother. Twelve centuries previously an Indian 
priest deposited on the spot where this monument afterwards 
stood a relic of Buddha, and raised over the sacred object a small 
pagoda of three stories in height. During the disturbed times 
which heralded the close of the Yuen dynasty (1368) this pagoda 
was utterly destroyed. It was doubtless out of respect to the relic, 
which then perished that Yung-lo chose this site for the erection 
of his " token-of-gratitude " pagoda. The building was begun 
in 1413. But before it was finished Yung-lo had passed away, 
and it was reserved for his successor to see the final pinnacle 
fixed in its place, after nineteen years had been consumed in 
carrying out the designs of the imperial architect. In shape the 
pagoda was an octagon, and was about 260 ft. in height, or, as 
the Chinese say, with that extraordinary love for inaccurate 
accuracy which is peculiar to them, 32 chang (a chang equals 
about 1 20 in.) 9 ft. 4 in. and -fa of an inch. The outer walls were 
cased with bricks of the finest white porcelain, and each of the 
nine stories into which the building was divided was marked by 
overhanging eaves composed of green glazed tiles of the same 
material. The summit was crowned with a gilt ball fixed on the 
top of an iron rod, which in its turn was encircled by nine iron 
rings. Hung on chains which stretched from this apex to the 
eaves of the roof were five large pearls of good augury for the 
safety of the city. One was supposed to avert floods, another 
to prevent fires, a third to keep dust-storms at a distance, a 
fourth to allay tempests, and a fifth to guard the city 
against disturbances. From the eaves of the several stories 
there hung one hundred and fifty-two bells and countless 
lanterns. In bygone days Nanking was one of the chief 
literary centres of the empire, besides being famous for 
its manufacturing industries. Satin, crape, nankeen, cloth, 
paper, pottery, and artificial flowers were among its chief 
products. 

At Nanking, after its capture by British ships in 1842, Sir 
Henry Pottinger signed the " Nanking treaty." It was made a 
treaty port by the French treaty of 1858, but was not formally 
opened. Its proximity to Chinkiang, where trade had established 
itself while Nanking was still in the hands of the rebels, made its 
opening of little advantage, and the point was not pressed. In 
1899 it was voluntarily thrown open to foreign trade by the 
Chinese government, and in 1909 it was connected by railway 
(192 m. long) with Shanghai. 

Since 1880 Nanking has been slowly recovering from the ruin 
caused by the T'aip'ing rebellion. Barely one-fourch of the area 
within the walls has been reoccupied, and though its ancient 
industries are reviving, no great progress has been made. As the 
seat of the provincial government of Kiang-nan, however, 
which embraces the three provinces of Kiang-su, Kiang-si, 
and Ngan-hui, Nanking is a city of first-class importance. The 
viceroy of Kiang-nan is the most powerful of all the provincial 
satraps, as he controls a larger revenue than any other, and has 
the command of larger forces both naval and military. He is 
also superintendent of foreign trade for the southern ports, 
including Shanghai, a position which gives him great weight in 
all political questions. The city contains an arsenal for the 
manufacture of munitions of war, also powder-mills. A naval 
college was opened in 1800, and an imperial military college a 
few years later under foreign instructors. The only foreign 
residents are missionaries (mostly American), and employes of 
the Chinese government. The only remaining features of interest 
in Nanking are the so-called Ming Tombs, being the mausolea 
of Hung-wu, the founder of the Ming dynasty, and of one or two 
of his successors, which lie outside the eastern wall of the city. 
They are ill cared for and rapidly going to decay. Since 1899 the 
foreign trade has shown a steady increase. 


NANNING. a treaty port in the province of Kwangsi, China, 
on the West river, 250 m. above Wuchow and 470 m. from 
Canton. Pop. about 40,000. It is the highest point accessible 
for steam traffic on the West river. From Canton to Wuchow 
the river has a minimum depth of 8 ft., but on the section from 
Wuchow to Nanning not more than 3 or 4 ft. are found during 
winter. The town is the chief market on the southern frontier. 
Its opening was long opposed by the French government, who 
had acquired the right to build a railway to it from Tongking, 
by which they hoped to divert the trade through their own 
possessions. Navigation by small native boats is open west- 
wards as far as Paise. 


NANSEN, FRIDTJOF (1861- ), Norwegian scientist, ex- 
plorer and statesman, was born at Froen near Christiania on 
the 10th of October 1861. His childhood was spent at this place 
till his fifteenth year, when bis parents removed to Christiania, 
where he" went to school. He entered Christiania university in 
1880, where he made a special study of zoology; in March 1882 
he joined the sealing-ship " Viking " for a voyage to Greenland 
waters. On his return in the same year he was appointed 
curator of the Bergen Museum, under the eminent physician 
and zoologist Daniel Cornelius Danielssen (1815-1894). In 1886 
he spent a short time at the zoological station at Naples. During 
this time he wrote several papers and memoirs on zoological and 
histological subjects, and for one paper on " The Structure and 
Combination of the Histological Elements of the Central Nervous 
System " (Bergen, 1887) the Christiania university conferred 
upon him the degree of doctor of philosophy. But his voyage in 
the " Viking " had indicated Greenland as a possible field for 
exploration, and in 1887 he set about preparations for a crossing 
of the great ice-field which covers the interior of that country. 
The possibility of his success was discountenanced by many 
Arctic authorities, and a small grant he had asked for was refused 
by the Norwegian government, but was provided by Augustin 
Gamel, a merchant of Copenhagen, while he paid from his private 
means the greater part of the expenses of the expedition. As 
companions Nansen had Otto Neumann Sverdrup (b. 1855), 

Captain O. C. Dietrichson (b. 1856), a third compatriot, and 
two Lapps. The expedition started in May 1888, proceeding 
from Leith to Iceland, and there joining a sealing-ship bound 
for the east coast of Greenland. On the 17th of July Nansen 
decided to leave the ship and force a way through the ice-belt 
to the land, about 10 m. distant, but the party encountered 
great difficulties owing to ice-pressures, went adrift with the ice, 
and only reached the land on the 29th, having been carried far 
to the south in the interval. They made their way north again, 
along the coast inside the drift ice, and on the 16th of August 
began the ascent of the inland ice. Suffering severely from 
storms, intense cold, and other hardships, they reached the 
highest point of the journey (8920 ft.) on the 5th of September, 
and at the end of the month struck the west coast at the Ameralik 
Fjord. On reaching the settlement of Godthaab it was found 
that the party must winter there, and Nansen used the oppor- 
tunity to study the Eskimos and gather material for his book, 
Eskimo Life (English translation, London, 1893). The party 
returned home in May 1889, and Nansen 's book, The First 
Crossing of Greenland (English translation, London, 1890), 
demonstrates the valuable scientific results of the journey. A 
report of the scientific results was published in Petermanns 
Mitteilungen (Gotha, 1892). On his return from Greenland 
Nansen accepted the curatorship of the Zootomic Museum of 
Christiania university. In September 1889 he married Eva, 
daughter of Professor Michael Sars of Christiania university, 
and a noted singer (d. 1907). 

In 1890 he propounded his scheme for a polar expedition 
before the Norwegian Geographical Society, and in 1892 he 
laid it before the Royal Geographical Society in London (see 
" How can the North Polar Region be crossed ?" Geogr. Journal, 
vol. i.), by which time his preparations were well advanced. 
His theory, that a drift-current sets across the polar regions 
from Bering Strait and the neighbourhood of the New Siberia 
Islands towards the east coast of Greenland, was based on a 
number of indications, notably the discovery (1884), on drift 
ice off the south-west coast of Greenland, of relics of the American 
north polar expedition in the ship " Jeannette," which sank 
N.E. of the New Siberia Islands in 1881. His intention was 
therefore to get his vessel fixed in the ice to the north of Eastern 
Siberia and let her drift with it. His plan was adversely criticized 
by many Arctic authorities, but it succeeded. The Norwegian 
parliament granted two-thirds of the expenses, and the rest was 
obtained by subscription from King Oscar and private indi- 
viduals. His ship, the " Fram " (i.e. " Forward ") ? was specially 
built of immense strength and peculiar form, being pointed at 
bow and stern and having sloping sides, so that the ice-floes, 
pressing together, should tend, not to crush, but merely to slip 
beneath and lift her. She sailed from Christiania on the 24th of 
June 1893. Otto Sverdrup was master; Sigurd Scott Hansen, 
a Norwegian naval lieutenant, was in charge of the astronomical 
and meteorological observations; Henrik Greve Blessing was 
doctor and botanist; and among the rest was Frederik Hjalmar 
Johansen, lieutenant in the Norwegian army, who shipped as 
fireman. On the 22nd of September the " Fram " was made 
fast to a floe in 78 50' N., 133 37' E.; shortly afterwards she 
was frozen in, and the long drift began. She bore the pressure 
of the ice perfectly. During the winter of 1894 -1895 it was 
decided that an expedition should be made northward over 
the ice on foot in the spring, and on the 14th of March 1895 
Nansen, being satisfied that the "Fram" would continue to 
drift safely, left her in 84 N., 101 55' E., and started northward 
accompanied by Johansen. On the 8th of April they turned 
back from 86° 14' N., the highest latitude then reached by man; 
and they shaped their course for Franz Josef Land. They 
suffered many hardships, including shortage of food, and were 
compelled to winter on Frederick Jackson Island (so named 
hy Nansen) in Franz Josef Land from the 26th of August 1895 
to the 19th of May 1896. They were uncertain as to the locality, 
but, after having reached 8o° N. on the south coast of the islands, 
they were travelling westward to reach Spitsbergen, when, on 
the 17th of June 1896, they fell in with Frederick Jackson and 
his party of the Jackson-Harmsworth expedition, and returned 
to Norway in his ship, the " Windward," reaching Vardo on the 
13th of August. A week later the " Fram " also reached Norway 
in safety. She had drifted north after Nansen had left her, 
to 85 57', and had ultimately returned by the west coast of 
Spitsbergen. An unprecedented welcome awaited Nansen. In 
England he gave the narrative of his journey at a great meeting 
in the Albert Hall, London, on the 8th of February 1897, 
and elsewhere. He received a special medal from the Royal 
Geographical Society, honorary degrees from the universities of 
Oxford and Cambridge, and a presentation of books (the " Chal- 
lenger " Reports) from the British government, and similar 
honours were paid him in other countries. The English version 
of the narrative of the expedition is entitled Farthest North 
(London, 1897), and the scientific results are given in The 
Norwegian North Polar Expedition 1893-1896; Scientific Results 
(London, &c., 1900 sqq.). 

In 1905, in connexion with the crisis between Norway and 
Sweden, which was folio wed by the separation of the kingdoms, 
Nansen for the first time actively intervened in politics. He 
issued a manifesto and many articles, in which he adopted an 
attitude briefly indicated by the last words of a short work 
published later in the year: "Any union in which the one 
people is restrained in exercising its freedom is and will remain 
a danger " (Norway and the Union with Sweden, London, 1005). 
On the establishment of the Norwegian monarchy Nansen was 
appointed minister to England (1906), and in the same year he 
was created G.C.V.O.; but in 1908 he retired from his post, 
and became professor of oceanography in Christiania university. 


NANSEN, HANS (1598-1667), Danish statesman, son of the 
burgher Evert Nansen, was born at Flensburg on the 28th of 
November 1598. He made several voyages to the White Sea 
and to places in northern Russia, and in 1621 entered the service 
of the Danish Icelandic Company, then in its prime. For 
many years the whole trade of Iceland, which he frequently 
visited, passed through his hands, and he soon became equally 
well known at Gliickstadt, then the chief emporium of the 
Iceland trade, and at Copenhagen. In February 1644, at the 
express desire of King Christian IV., the Copenhagen burgesses 
elected him burgomaster. During his northern voyages he had 
learnt Russian, and was employed as interpreter at court when- 
ever Muscovite embassies visited Copenhagen. His travels had 
begotten in him a love of geography, and he published in 1633 
a " Kosmografi," previously revised by the astronomer Longo- 
montanus. During the siege of Copenhagen by the Swedes in 
1658 he came prominently forward. At the meeting between the 
king and the citizens to arrange for the defence of the capital, 
Nansen urged the necessity of an obstinate defence. It was he 
who on this occasion obtained privileges for the burgesses of 
Copenhagen which placed them on a footing of equality with 
the nobility; and he was the life and soul of the garrison till 
the arrival of the Dutch fleet practically saved the city. These 
eighteen months of storm and stress established his influence 
in the capital once for all and at the same time knitted him 
closely to Frederick III., who recognized in Nansen a man 
after his own heart, and made the great burgomaster his chief 
instrument in carrying through the anti-aristocratic Revolution 
of 1660. Nansen used all the arts of the agitator with 
extraordinary energy and success. His greatest feat was the 
impassioned speech by which, on October 8th, he induced the 
burgesses to accede to the proposal of the magistracy of Copen- 
hagen to offer Frederick III. the realm of Denmark as a purely 
hereditary kingdom. How far Nansen was content with the 
result of the Revolution — absolute monarchy — it is impossible 
to say. It appears to be pretty certain that, at the beginning, 
he did not want absolutism. Whether he subsequently regarded 
the victory of the monarchy and its corollary, the admittance 
of the middle classes to all offices and dignities, as a satisfactory 
equivalent for his original demands; or whether he was so 
overcome by royal favour as to sacrifice cheerfully the political 
liberties of his country, can only be a matter for conjecture. 
After the Revolution Nansen continued in high honour, but 
he chiefly occupied himself with commerce, and was less and less 
consulted in purely political matters. He died on the 12th of 
November 1667. 

BiBLiOGRAPHY.y-Oluf Nielsen, Kjobenhavns Historic, iii. (Copen- 
hagen, 1877); Julius Albert Fridericia, Adelsvaeldens sidste Dage 
(Copenhagen, 1894); Danmarks Riges Historie, v. (Copenhagen, 
1897-1905). (R. N. B.) 


NANTERRE, a town of northern France, with a port on the 
Seine, in the department of Seine, at the foot of Mount Valerien, 
8 m. N.W. of Paris on the railway to St Germain. Pop. (1906), 
town, 11,874; commune, 17,434. The principal manufactures 
are chemicals, tallow and aluminium; stone quarried in the 
vicinity; the town is noted also for its cakes. The combined 
prison and mendicity depot for the department is a large 
institution, about 2 m. from the town. Nanterre (the ancient 
Nemptodurum or Nemetodurum) owes its origin to the shrine 
of Ste Genevieve (420-512), the patron-saint of Paris, whose 
name is still associated with various places in the town and 
district. The shrine is the object of a pilgrimage in September. 


NANTES, a city of western France, capital of the .department 
of Loire-Inferieure, on the right bank of the Loire, 35 m. above 
its mouth, at the junction of the Orleans, Western and State 
railways, 55 m. W.S.W. of Angers by rail. In population 
(town, 118,244; commune, 133,247, in 1906) Nantes is the first 
city of Brittany. The Loire here divides into several branches 
forming islands over portions of which the city has spread. 
It receives on the left hand the Sevre Nantaise, and on the right 
the Erdre, which forms the outlet of the canal between Nantes 
and Brest. The maritime port of Nantes is reached by way of 
the Loire and the ship canal between the island of Carnet and 
La Martiniere (9^ m.). Vessels drawing as much as 20 ft. 8 in., 
and at spring tides, 22 ft., can reach the port, which extends over 
a length of about i\ m. The outer port as far as the industrial 
suburb of Chantenay has a length of over half a mile. The 
principal quays extend along the right bank of the branch 
which flows past the town, and on the western shore of the island 
of Gloriette, Their total length used for trading purposes is 
5 m., and warehouses cover an area of 17 acres. A slipway 
facilitates the repairing of ships. The river port occupies the 
St Felix and Madeleine branches, and has quays extending for 
half a mile. Finally/ on the Erdre is a third port for inland 
navigation. The quays are bounded by railway lines along the 
right bank of the river, which the railway to St Nazaire follows. 
The older quarter of Nantes containing the more interesting 
buildings is situated to the east of the Erdre. 

The cathedral, begun in 1434 in the Gothic style, was unfinished 
till the 19th century when the transept and choir were added. 
There are two interesting monuments in the transept — on the 
right Michel Colomb's tomb of Francis II., duke of Brittany, and 
his second wife Marguerite de Foix (1507), and on the left that of 
General Juchault de Lamoriciere, a native of Nantes, by Paul 
Dubois (1879). Of the other churches the most interesting is 
St Nicolas, a modern building in the style of the 13th century, 
on the right bank of the Erdre. Between the cathedral and the 
Loire, from which it is separated only by the breadth of the quay, 
stands the castle of Nantes, founded in the 9th or 10th century. 
Rebuilt by Francis II. and the duchess Anne, it is flanked by 
huge towers and by a bastion erected by Philip Emmanuel 
duke of Mercceur in the time of the League. A fine facade in 
the Gothic style looks into the courtyard. From being the 
residence of the dukes of Brittany, the castle became a state 
prison in which Jean-Francois Paul de Gondi, Cardinal de Retz, 
Nicholas Fouquet, and Marie Louise of Naples, duchess of 
Berry, were'at different times confined; it is now occupied as the 
artillery headquarters. The chapel in which the marriage of 
Louis XII. with Anne of Brittany was celebrated was destroyed 
by an explosion in 1800. The Exchange (containing the tribunal 
and chamber of commerce), the Grand Theatre, the Prefecture 
and the town hall are buildings of the last half of the 18th or 
early 19th century; the law courts date from the middle of the 
19th century. Nantes has an archaeological collection in the 
Dobree Museum, and in the museum of fine arts a splendid 
collection of paintings, modern French masters being well 
represented; it also has a natural history museum, a large library 
rich in manuscripts and a botanical garden to the east. The 
Pommeraye Passage, which connects streets on different levels 
and is built in stages connected by staircases, dates from 1843. 
Between the Loire and the Erdre run the Cours St Pierre and 
the Cours St Andr6, adorned at the two ends of tlie line by 
statues of Anne of Brittany and Arthur III., Bertrand du 
Guesclin and Olivier de Clisson, and separated by the Place 
Louis XVI., with a statue of that monarch on a lofty column. 
The Place Royale, to the west of the Erdre, the great meeting- 
place of the principal thoroughfares of the city, contains a 
monumental fountain with allegorical statues of Nantes and the 
Loire and its affluents. A flight of steps at the west end of the 
town leads up from the quay to the colossal cast-iron statue of 
St Anne, whence a splendid view may be obtained over the 
valley of the Loire. Several old houses of the 15th and 16th 
centuries, the fish market and the Salorges (a vast granite 
building now used as a bonded warehouse) are of interest. 
Nantes has two great hospitals — St Jacques on the left bank of 
the Loire, and the Hotel-Dieu in Gloriette Island. It is the seat 
of a bishopric and a court of assizes, and headquarters of the* 
XL army corps; it has tribunals of first instance and of 
commerce, a board of trade-arhitrators, a chamber of commerce 
and a branch of the Bank of France. The educational institu- 
tions include lyc6es for both sexes, a training college for girls, 
schools of medicine and pharmacy and law, a preparatory school 
to higher instruction, science and letters, schools of music, art and 
navigation, technical and commercial schools, and a school for 
deaf-mutes and the blind. 

Among the more important industries of Nantes are sugar- 
refining, flour-milling, rice-husking, the manufacture of oil, 
soap, flour pastes and biscuits, and the preparation of tinned 
provisions (sardines, vegetables, &c); the manufacture of tin 
boxes, tiles, chemical manures, acid from chestnut bark, tobacco, 
leather, wood-pulp for paper, rope, boots and shoes, brushes 
and glass; saw-milling, shipbuilding, metal founding and the 
construction of engineering material; and wool and cotton- 
spinning and the manufacture of cotton and other fabrics, 
hosiery and knitted goods. Coal and patent fuel (chiefly from 
Great Britain) are the most important imports; next come 
phosphates and pyrites; other imports are timber and pulp- wood. 
The principal exports are bunker-coal (to French colonies), 
pyrites, slate, hoops and provisions. In the ten years 189&- 
1907 the average annual value of the imports was £2,657,000; 
of the exports £795,000. In 1907 there entered from foreign 
countries 738 vessels (209 British) with tonnage of 584,850, 
and cleared 778 with 154,720 tons of cargo, and 458,538 tons 
of hallast. Reckoning ships carrying cargo only the figures for 
the first and last years of the decade 1898-1907 were: 1898, 
ships entered, French 209 (tonnage 75,249), foreign 250 (tonnage 
154*936); ships cleared, French 173 (tonnage 32,591), foreign 
97 (tonnage 27,836): 1907, ships entered, French 186 (tonnage 
127,635), foreign 419 (tonnage 361,002); ships cleared, French 
126 (tonnage 81,299), foreign 128 (tonnage 45,181). 

Before the Roman occupation Nantes was the chief town of 
the Namnetes and consisted of Condovicnum, lying on the hills 
away from the river, and of Partus Namnetum, on the river. 
Under the Romans it became a great commercial and admini- 
strative centre, though its two parts did not coalesce till the 3rd 
or 4th century. In the middle of the 3rd century Christianity 
was introduced by St Clair. Clotaire I. got possession of the 
city in 560, and placed it under the government of St Fe*lix 
the bishop, who executed enormous works to cause the Loire 
to flow under the walls of the castle. After being several times 
subdued by Charlemagne, Brittany revolted under his successors, 
and Nominoe, proclaimed king in 842, ordered the fortifications 
of Nantes to be razed because it had sided with Charles the Bald. 
The Normans held the town from 843 to 936. About this time 
began the rivalry between Nantes and Rennes, whose counts 
disputed the sovereignty of Brittany. Pierre de Dreux, declared 
duke of Brittany by Philip Augustus, made Nantes his capital, 
surrounded it with fortifications and defended it valiantly 
against John of England. During the Breton wars of succession 
Nantes took part first with Jean de Montfort, but afterwards 
with Charles of Blois, and did not open its gates to Monfort 
till his success was assured and his English allies had retired. 
In 1560 Francis II. granted Nantes a communal constitution. 
In the course of the 15th and 16th centuries the city suffered 
from several epidemics. Averse to Protestantism, it joined the 
League along with the duke of Mercceur, governor of Brittany, 
who helped to raise the country into an independent duchy; 
and it was not till 1598 that it opened its gates to Henry IV., 
who here signed on the 2nd of May of that year the famous 
Edict of Nantes which until its revocation by Louis XIV. in 
1685 was the charter of Huguenot liberties in France. It was 
at Nantes that Henry de Talleyrand, count of Chalais, was 
punished in 1626 for plotting against Richelieu, that Fouquet 
was arrested in 1661, and that the Cellamare conspirators were 
executed under the regent Philip of Orleans. Having warmly 
embraced the cause of the Revolution in 1789, the city was in 
1793 treated with extreme rigour by J. B. Carrier, envoy of 
the Committee of Public Safety, whose noyades or wholesale 
drownings of prisoners became notorious. Nantes on more than 
one occasion vigorously resisted the Vendeans. It was here 
that the duchess of Berry was arrested in 1832 while trying to 
stir up La Vendee against Louis Philippe. 


NANTES, EDICT OF, the law promulgated in April 1598 by 
which the French king, Henry IV., gave religious liberty to his 
Protestant subjects, the Huguenots. The story of the struggle 
for the edict is part of the history of France, and during the 
thirty-five years of civil war which preceded its grant, many 
treaties and other arrangements had been made between the 
contending religious parties, but none of these had been satis- 
factory or lasting. The elation of the Protestants at the accession 
of Henry IV. in 1589 was followed by deep depression, when it 
was found that not only did he adopt the Roman Catholic faith, 
but that his efforts to redress their grievances were singularly 
ineffectual. In 1594 they took determined measures to protect 
themselves; in 1597, the war with Spain being practically over, 
long negotiations took place between the king and their repre- 
sentatives, prominent among whom was the historian J. A. de 
Thou, and at last the edict was drawn up. It consisted of 95 
general articles, which were signed by Henry at Nantes on the 
13th of April 1598, and of 56 particular ones, signed on the 
2nd of May. There was also some supplementary matter. 

The main provisions of the edict of Nantes may be briefly 
summarized under six heads: (1) It gave liberty of conscience 
to the Protestants throughout the whole of France. (2) It 
gave to the Protestants the right of holding public worship in 
those places where they had held it in the year 1576 and in the 
earlier part of 1577; also in places where this freedom had been 
granted by the edict of Poitiers (1577) and the treaties of Nerac 
( x 579) and of Felix (1580). The Protestants could also worship 
in two towns in each bailliage and s$n€chaus6e. The greater 
nobles could hold Protestant services in their houses; the 
lesser nobles could do the same, but only for gatherings of not 
more than thirty people. Regarding Paris, the Protestants 
could conduct worship within five leagues of the city; previously 
this prohibition had extended to a distance of ten leagues. 
(3) Full civil rights were granted to the Protestants. They could 
trade freely, inherit property and enter the universities, colleges 
and schools. All official positions were open to them. (4) To 
deal with disputes arising out of the edict a chamber was estab- 
lished in the parlement of Paris (le chatnbre de I'Sdil). This 
was to be composed of ten Roman Catholic, and of six Protestant 
members. Chambers for the same purpose, but consisting of 
Protestants and Roman Catholics in equal numbers, were estab- 
lished in connexion with the provincial parlements. (5) The 
Protestant pastors were to be paid by the state and to be freed 
from certain burdens, their position being made practically 
equal to that of the Roman Catholic clergy. (6) A hundred 
places of safety were given to the Protestants for eight years, 
the expenses of garrisoning them being undertaken by the king. 

In many ways the terms of the edict were very generous to 
the Protestants, but it must be remembered that the liberty 
to hold public worship was made the exception and not the rule; 
this was prohibited except in certain specified cases, and in this 
respect they were less favourably treated than they were under 
the arrangement made in 1576. 

The edict was greatly disliked by the Roman Catholic clergy 
and their friends, and a few changes were made to conciliate them. 
The parlement of Paris shared this dislike, and succeeded in 
reducing the number of Protestant members of the chatnbre 
de Vtdit from six to one. Then cajoled and threatened by Henry, 
the parlement registered the edict on the 25th of February 
1 599. After similar trouble it was also registered by the provincial 
parlements, the last to take this step being the parlement of 
Rouen, which delayed the registration until 1609. 

The strong political position secured to the French Protestants 
by the edict of Nantes was very objectionable, not only to the 
ardent Roman Catholics, but also to more moderate persons, 
and the payments made to their ministers by the state were 
viewed with increasing dislike. Thus about 1660 a strong move- 
ment began for its repeal, and this had great influence with the 
king. One after another proclamations and declarations were 
issued which deprived the Protestants of their rights under the 
edict; their position was rendered intolerable by a series of 
persecutions which culminated in the dragonnades, and at length 
on the 18th of October 1685 Louis revoked the edict, thus depriv- 
ing the Protestants in France of all civil and religious liberty. 
This gave a new impetus to the emigration of the Huguenots, 
which had been going on for some years, and England, Holland 
and Brandenburg received numbers of thrifty and industrious 
French families. 

The history of the French Protestants, to which the edict of Nantes 
belongs, is dealt with in the articles France : History.smd Huguenots. 
For further details about the edict see the papers and documents 
published as Le Troisieme centenaire de Vedit de Nantes (1898); 
N. A. F. Puaux, Hisioire du Protestantisme francais (Paris, 1894); 
H. M. Baird, The Huguenots and the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes 
(London, 1895); C. Benoist, La Condition des Protestants sous le 
rigime de Vteit de Nantes et apres sa revocation (Paris, 1900) ; A. Lods, 
V&dit de Nantes devant le parlement de Paris (1899) ; and the Bulletin 
historique et litt&raire of the Soci^te" de THistoire du Protestantisme 
Francais. 


NANTEUIL, ROBERT (1623-1678), French line-engraver, was 
born about 1623, or, as other authorities state, in 1630, the 
son of a merchant of Reims. Having received an excellent 
classical education, he studied engraving under his brother-in- 
law, Nicholas Regnesson; and, his crayon portraits having 
attracted attention, he was pensioned by Louis XIV. and 
appointed designer and engraver of the cabinet to that monarch. 
It was mainly due to his influence that the king granted the 
edict of 1660, dated from St Jean de Luz, by which engraving 
was pronounced free and distinct from the mechanical arts, and 
its practitioners were declared entitled to the privileges of other 
artists. He died at Paris in 1678. The plates of Nanteuil, 
several of them approaching the scale of life, number about three 
hundred. In his early practice he imitated the technique of 
his predecessors, working with straight lines, strengthened, but 
not crossed, in the shadows, in the style of Claude Mellan, and 
in other prints cross-hatching like Regnesson, or stippling in the 
manner of Jean Boulanger; but he gradually asserted his full 
individuality, modelling the faces of his portraits with the utmost 
precision and completeness, and employing various methods 
of touch for the draperies and other parts of his plates. Among 
the finest works of his fully developed period may be named 
the portraits of Pomponne de Bellicvre, Gilles Menage, Jean 
Loret, the due de la Meilleraye and the duchess de Nemours. 

A list of his works will be found in Dumesnirs Le Peintre-graveur 
francaiSy vol. iv. 


NANTICOKE, a borough of Luzerne county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., on the North Branch of the Susquehanna river, opposite 
West Nanticoke, and 8 m. S.W. of Wilkes-Barre. Pop. (1880), 
3884; (1890), 10,044; C 1 *) 00 )* 12,116, of whom 5055 were 
foreign-born; (1910 census) 18,877. It is served by the 
Pennsylvania, the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western and the 
Central of New Jersey railways, and by an interurban electric 
line. Nanticoke is situated in the anthracite coal region, is 
surrounded by mines, and its industries consist chiefly in mining 
and shipping coal; it also has various manufactures, and in 
1905 the factory product was valued at $358,091. Nanticoke 
was laid out in 1793, and was incorporated as a borough in 1874. 
The name is that of an Algonquian tribe of Indians, conspicuous 
for their dark complexion, who originally lived in Maryland, 
were conquered by the Iroquois in 1678 and subsequently 
scattered; the main body removed to lands along the eastern 
branch of the Susquehanna, where some of them became merged 
with the Iroquois, and others removed to the Ohio and became 
merged with the Delaware. 


NANTUCKET, a county and township (coextensive) of Massa- 
chusetts, U.S.A. Its principal part is an island of the same 
name, 28 m. S. of Cape Cod peninsula; it also includes the 
island of Tuckernuck, which has an area of 1*97 sq. m., and is 
used for sheep grazing; Muskeget Island, which has excellent 
hunting, and of which about one-half is a public park; and the 
Gravel Islands and other islets. Pop. of the county (1905 
state census), 2930; (1910) 2962. 

The island, with a minimum length of 15 m., an average width 
of z\ m., and an area of about 47 sq. m., has a coast-line of 
88 m.; it lies within the 10-fathom line, but is separated from 
the mainland by Nantucket Sound, which is 25 to 30 m. across 
and has a maximum depth of 50 ft. The surface of Nantucket 
Island is open, nearly treeless, with a few hills, the highest being 
91 ft. above sea-level. The soil is sandy but affords good pasture 
in some places, and has been farmed with some success; the 
flora is rich, and includes some rare species. There are a score 
of fresh- water ponds, the largest being Hummock (320 acres). 
Copaum (21 acres) was, at the time of the first settlement, a bay 
and the commonly used harbour, but the present harbour (6 m. 
long) is that formed by Coatue Beach, a long narrow tongue of 
land on the N. side of the island. The northern part of Coatue 
Beach is known as Coskata Beach, and curves to the N.W.; 
near its tip is Great Point, where a lighthouse was first built in 
1784. There have been many terrible wrecks on the coast, 
and there are life-saving stations on Muskeget Island, near 
Maddaket, at Surfside and on Coskata Beach. At the W. end 
of the island is Tuckernuck Bank, a broad submarine platform, 
on whose edge are the island of Tuckernuck, on which is a village 
of the same name, and Muskeget Island. In the S.E. extremity 
of Nantucket Island is Siasconset (locally 'Sconset), a summer 
resort of some vogue; it has a Marconi wireless telegraph 
station, connecting with incoming steamers, the Nantucket 
shoals lightship and the mainland. On a bluff on the S. is the 
small village of Surfside. Other hamlets are Maddaket, at the 
\V. end of the island; and Polpis, Quidnet and Wauwinet (at 
the head of Nantucket harbour) in its E. part. 

The principal settlement and summer resort is the town of 
Nantucket (on the S.W. end of the harbour), which is served by 
steamers from New Bedford, Martha's Vineyard and Wood's 
Hole, and is connected with Siasconset by a primitive narrow- 
gauge railway. Here there are large summer hotels, old resi- 
dences built in the prosperous days of whaling, old lean-to houses, 
old graveyards and an octagonal towered windmill built in 1746. 
There are two libraries; one founded in 1836, and now a public 
library in the Atheneum building; and the other in what is 
now the School of Industrial and Manual Training (1904), founded 
in 1827 as a Lancasterian school by Admiral Sir Isaac Coffin 
(1 759-1839), whose ancestors were Nantucket people. The 
Jethro Coffin House was built in 1686, according to tradition; 
the Old North Vestry, the first Congregational meeting-house, 
built in 1711, was moved in 1767, and again in 1834 to its present 
site on Beacon Hill. The old South Church Tower, a steeple and 
clock tower, 144 ft. above sea-level, has a fine Portuguese bell, 
made in 18 10. Another old house, built in 1725, was the home 
of Elihu Coleman, an anti-slavery minister of the Society of 
Friends, who were very strong here until the close of the first 
quarter of the 19th century. Near the old Friends' School is 
the building of the Nantucket Historical Society, which has a 
collection of relics. Nantucket was the home of Benjamin 
Franklin's mother, Abiah, whose father, Peter Folger, was one 
of the earliest settlers (1663); of Maria Mitchell, and of Lucretia 
Mott. Adjoining the Maria Mitchell homestead is a memorial 
astronomical observatory and library, containing the collections 
of Miss Mitchell and of her brother, Professor Henry Mitchell 
(1830-1902), a distinguished hydrographer. The industries of 
the island are unimportant ; there is considerable cod and scallop 
fishing. Sheep-raising was once an important industry. Nan- 
tucket was long famous as a whaling port. As early as the 
beginning of the 18th century its fleets vied with those of eastern 
Long Island. In 1712 a Nantucket whaler, Christopher Hussey, 
blown out to sea, killed some sperm whales and thus introduced 
the sperm-oil industry and put an end to the period in which 
only drift- and shore- or boat-whaling had been carried on — 
the shore fishery died out about 1760. In 1757 whaling was the 
only livelihood of the people of Nantucket; and in 1750-1775, 
although whaling fleets were in repeated danger from French 
and Spanish privateers, the business, with the allied coopers 
and other trades, steadily increased. In 1775 the Nantucket 
fleet numbered 1 50, and the population was between 5000 and 
6000, about 90% being Quakers; but by 1785 the fleet had 
been shattered, 134 ships being destroyed or captured during 
the war. Tallow candles as a substitute for whale-oil had been 
introduced, and the British market was closed by a duty of 
£18 a ton on oil; a bounty offered by the Massachusetts legis- 
lature (£5 on white and £3 on yellow or brown spermaceti, 
and £2 on whale-oil per ton) was of slight assistance. During the 
war of 1 81 2 the Nantucket fleet was the only one active; it 
suffered severely during the war, and in the decade 1820-1830 
Nantucket lost its primacy to New Bedford, whose fleet in 1840 
was twice as large. Nantucket's last whaler sailed in 1869. 
Subsequently the island has been chiefly important as a summer 
resort. 

Title to Nantucket and the neighbouring islands was claimed 
under grants of. the Council for New England both by William 
Alexander, Lord Stirling, and by Sir Ferdinando Gorges. Lord 
Stirling's agent sold them in 1641 to Thomas Mayhew (1592- 
1682) of Watertown, Mass., and his son Thomas (c. 16 16- 
1657) for £40, and a little later the elder Mayhew obtained 
another deed for Martha's Vineyard from Gorges. In 1659 the 
elder Mayhew sold a joint interest in the greater part of the 
island of Nantucket for £30 and two beaver hats to nine partners; 
early in the following year the first ten admitted ten others as 
equal proprietors, and later, in order to encourage them to settle 
here, special half-grants were offered to tradesmen. The original 
twenty proprietors, however, endeavoured to exclude the trades- 
men from any voice in the government, and this caused strife. 
Both factions appealed to the governor of New York, that pro- 
vince haying claimed jurisdiction over the islands under the 
grant to the duke of York in 1664, and, becoming increasingly 
dissatisfied with that government, sought a union with Massa- 
chusetts until the islands were annexed to that province by its 
new charter of 1691. The town of Nantucket was settled in 
1661 and was incorporated in 1671. By order of Governor 
Francis Lovelace it was named Sherburne in 1673, but in 1795 
the present name was adopted. Its original site was Maddaket 
on the W. end of the island; in 1672 it was moved to its present 
site, then called Wescoc. When counties were first organized in 
New York, in 1683, Nantucket and the neighbouring islands 
were erected into Dukes county, but in 1695, after annexation 
to Massachusetts,' Nantucket Island, having been set apart from 
Dukes county, constituted Nantucket county, and in 17 13 
Tuckernuck Island was annexed to it. 

See the bulletins (1896 sqq.) of the Nantucket Historical Society, 
established in 1894; F. B. Hough, Papers relating to the Island of 
Nantucket . . . while under the Colony of New York (Albany, N.Y., 
1856); M. S. Dudley, Nantucket Centennial Celebration; Historic 
Sites and Historic Buildings (Nantucket, 3895) ; Obed Macy, History 
of Nantucket (Boston, 1835); L. S. Hinchman, Early Settlers of 
Nantucket (Philadelphia, 1896; 2nd ed., 1901); W. S. Bliss, Quaint 
Nantucket (Boston, 1896); and N. S. Shaler, Geology of Nantucket 
(Washington, 1889), being U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin, No. 53. 


NANTWICH, a market town in the Crewe parliamentary 
division of Cheshire, England, 161 m. N.W. of London, on the 
London & North-Western and Great Western railways. Pop. 
of urban district (1001) 7722. It lies on the river Weaver, in the 
upper part of its flat, open valley. The church of St Mary and 
St Nicholas is a cruciform building in red sandstone, of the 
Decorated and Perpendicular periods, with a central octagonal 
tower. The fine old carved stalls are said to have belonged to 
Vale Royal Abbey, near Winsford in this county. Nantwich re- 
tains not a few old timbered houses of the 16th and 17th centuries, 
but the town as a whole is modern in appearance. The grammar 
school was founded in 1611. The salt industry, still the staple of 
several towns lower down the vale of the Weaver, was so 
important here in the time of Henry VIII. that there were three 
hundred salt-works. Though this industry has lapsed, there are 
brine baths, much used in cases of rheumatism, gout and general 
debility, and the former private mansion of Shrewbridge Hall is 
converted into a hotel with a spa. Nantwich has tanneries, a 
manufacture of boots and shoes, and clothing factories; and 
corn-milling and iron-founding are carried on. The town is one 
of the best hunting centres in the county, being within reach 
of several meets. 

From the traces of a Roman road between Nantwich and Middle- 
wich, and the various Roman remains that have been found in the 
neighbourhood, it has been conjectured that Nantwich was a salt- 
town in Roman times, but of this there is no conclusive evidence. 
The Domesday Survey contains a long account of the laws, customs 
and values of the salt-works at that period, which were by far the 
most profitable in Cheshire. The salt-houses were divided between 
the king, the earl of Chester and certain resident freemen of the 
neighbourhood. The name of the town appears variously as Wych 
Manbank, Wie Malban, Nantwich, Lache Mauban, Wysmanban, 
Wiens Malbanus, Namptewiche. About the year 1070 William 
Malbedeng or Malban k was created baron of Nantwich, which barony 
he held of the earl of Chester. In the 13th century the barony fell 
to three daughters and co-heiresses, and further subdivisions followed. 
This probably accounts for the lack of privileges belonging to Nant- 
wich as a corporate town. The only town charter is one of 1567- 
1568, in which Queen Elizabeth confirms an ancient orivilegeof 
the burgesses that they should not be upon assizesor juries with 
strangers, relating to matters outside the town. It is stated in the 
charter that the right to this privilege had been proved by an in- 

?[uisition taken in the 14th century, and had then already been held 
rom time immemorial. There was a gild merchant and also a town 
bailiff, but the latter office was of little real significance and was 
soon dropped. There is documentary evidence of a castle at Nant- 
wich in the 13th century. There is a weekly market on Saturday, 
held by prescription. In 1283 a three-days fair to be held at the 
feast of St Bartholomew was granted to Robert Burn el I, bishop of 
Bath and Wells (then holder of a share of the barony of Nantwich). 
This is the " Old Fair " or " Great Fair " now held on the 4th of 
September. Earl Cholmondeley received a grant of two fairs in 
1723. Fairs are now held on the first Thursday in April, June, 
September and December, and a cheese fair on the first Thursday in 
each month except January. The salt trade declined altogether in 
the 18th century, with the exception of one salt-works, which was 
kept open until 1856. There was a shoe trade in the town as early 
as the 17th century, and gloves were t made from the end of the 
16th century until about 1863. Weaving and stocking trades also 
flourished in the 18th century. The one corn-mill of Nantwich was 
converted into a cotton factory in 1789, but was closed in 1874. 
See James Hall, A History of Nantwich or Wick Milbank (1883). 


NAOROJI, DADABHAI (1825- ), Indian politician, was 
born at Nasik on the 4th of September 1825, the son of a Parsi 
priest. During a long and active life, he played many parts: 
professor of mathematics at the Elphinstone college (1854),; 
founder of the Rast Goftar newspaper; partner in a Parsi business 
firm in London (1855); prime minister of Baroda (1874); 
member of the Bombay legislative council (1885); M.P. for 
Central Finsbury (1892-1895), being the first Indian to be elected 
to the House of Commons; three times president of the Indian 
National Congress. Many of his numerous writings are collected 
in Poverty and Un-Briti$h Rule in India (1901). 


NAP, the pile on cloth, the surface of short fibres raised by 
special processes, differing with the various fabrics, and then 
smoothed and cut. Formerly the word was applied to the 
roughness on textiles before shearing. " Nap " in this sense 
appears in many Teutonic languages, cf. Ger. Noppe, Dutch nop, 
Nor. napp; the verbal form is noppen or nappen, to trim, cut 



short. The word nap also means a short sleep or doze (O. Eng. 
hnappian). In "napkin," a square of damask or other linen, 
used for wiping the hands and lips or for protecting the clothes 
at meals, the second part is a common English suffix, sometimes 
of diminutive force, and the first is from " nape," x Low Lat. 
napa or nappa, a corrupt form of mappa, table-cloth. Nape still 
survives in " napery," a name for household linen in general. 


NAPHTALI, in the Bible, the name of an Israelite tribe, the 
" son " of Jacob by Bilhah, Rachel's maid, and the uterine 
brother of Dan (Gen. xxx. 8). It lay to the south of Dan in the 
eastern half of upper Galilee (Josh. xix. 32-39), a fertile mountain- 
ous district (cf. Gen. xlix. 21; Deut. xxxiii. 23), open to the 
surrounding influences of Phoenicia and Aram. Apart from its 
share in the war against Sisera (Judg. iv. seq., see Deborah), 
little is known of it. It evidently suffered in the bloody conflicts 
of Damascus with Israel (1 Kings xv. 20), and was depopulated 
by Tiglath-Pileser IV. (2 Kings xv. 29; Isa. ix. 1). Naphtali and 
Dan are " brothers," perhaps partly on geographical grounds, 
but Dan also had a seat in the south (south-west of Ephraim), 
and the name of the " mother " Bilhah is apparently connected 
with Bilhan, an Edomite and also a Benjamite name (Gen. 
xxxvi. 27; 1 Chron. vii. 10). 

For the view connecting Naphtali (perhaps a geographical rather 
than a tribal term), or rather its Israelite inhabitants, with the south 
see the full discussion by H. W. Hogg, Ency. Bib. iii. col. 3332 sqq. 
with references. 


NAPHTHA, a word originally applied to the more fluid kinds of 
petroleum, issuing from the ground in the Baku district of 
Russia and in Persia. It is the va<j>Qa of Dioscorides, and the 
naphtha, or bitumen liquidum candidum of Pliny. By the alchemists 
the word was used principally to distinguish various highly 
volatile, mobile and inflammable liquids, such as the ethers, 
sulphuric ether and acetic ether having been known respectively 
as naphtha sulphurici and naphtha aceti. 

The tenn is now seldom used, either in commerce or in science, 
without a distinctive prefix, and we thus have the following: — 

1. Coal-tar Naphtha. — A volatile commercial product obtained by 
the distillation of coal-tar (see Coal-tar). * 

2. Shale Naphtha. — Obtained by distillation from the oil pro- 
duced by the destructive distillation of bituminous shale (see 
Paraffin). 

3. Petroleum NaphtJia. — A name sometimes given (e.g. in the 
United States) to a portion of the more volatile hydrocarbons 
distilled from petroleum (see Petroleum). 

4. Wood Naphtha. — Methyl alcohol (q.v.). 

5. Bone Naphtha. — Known also as bone oil or Dippel's oil. A 
volatile product of offensive odour obtained in the carbonization of 
bones for the manufacture of animal charcoal. 

6. Caoutchouc Naphtha. — A volatile product obtained by the 
destructive distillation of rubber. (B. R.) 


NAPHTHALENE, CioHg, a hydrocarbon discovered in the 
" carbolic " and " heavy oil " fractions of the coal-tar distillate 
(see Coal-tar) in 18 19 by A. Garden. It is a product of the 
action of heat on many organic compounds, being formed when 
the vapours of ether, camphor, acetic acid, ethylene, acetylene, 
&c, are passed through a red-hot tube (M. Berthelot, Jahresb., 
1851), or when petroleum is led through a red-hot tube packed 
with charcoal (A. Letny, Ber. t 1878, ri, p. 12 10). It may be 
synthesized by passing the vapour of phenyl btitylene bromide 
over heated soda lime (B. Aronheim, Ann., 1874, 171, p. 219); 
and by the action of ortho-xylylene bromide on sodium ethane 
tetracarboxylic ester, the resulting tetra-hydronaphthalene 
tctracarboxylic ester being hydrolysed and heated, when it 
yields hydronaphthalene dicarboxylic acid, the silver, salt of 
which decomposes on distillation into naphthalene and other 
products (A. v. Baeyer and W. H. Perkin, junr., Ber. t 1884, 
17, p. 451):— 

	r H ^CH,Br , Na-C(C0 2 R), c H ^CHrC(C0 2 R), 
	^ 4 ^CH 1 Br* 1 "Na-C(C0 2 R) 2 ""* * 4 ^CH,-C(C0 2 R), 
	-CHrCH-CCH 
	4, 
	CH,.C(CO,H), 
	CoH, «_ Ctf4< CHj tn . COjH <- C^^ch, .C(CO*H), 

	1 " Nape," the back of the neck, is of doubtful origin; it may be 
	a variant of " knap," a knob or protuberance. 

It is a colourless solid, which melts at 8o° C, and boils at 
2i8° C. It crystallizes in the monoclinic system; it is to be 
noted that a- and jS-naphthol assume almost identical forms, so 
that these three compounds have been called isomorphous. It is 
insoluble in water, but is readily soluble in alcohol, and ether. 
It has a characteristic smell, and is very volatile, distilling 
readily in a current of steam. It acts as a weak antiseptic. It is 
used for enriching coal gas, as a vermin killer, in the manufacture 
of certain azo dyes, and in the preparation of phthalic acid (q.v.). 
When passed through a red-hot tube packed with carbon it 
yields )3j3-dinaphthyl, (Ci H 7 )2. It forms a crystalline compound 
with picric acid. It readily forms addition products with 
chlorine and with hydrogen; the dichloride, Ci H 8 Cl2, is obtained 
as a yellow liquid by acting with hydrochloric acid and potassium 
chlorate; the solid tetrachloride, Cio H 8 CU, results when chlorine 
is passed into naphthalene dissolved in chloroform. Numerous 
hydrides are known; heated with red phosphorus and hydriodic 
acid the hydrocarbon yields mixtures of hydrides of composition 
C10H10 to C10H20. Sodium in boiling ethyl alcohol gives the 
a-dihydride, C10H10 (E. Bamberger, Ber., 1887, 20, p. 1705); 
and with boiling amyl alcohol the jS-tetrahydride, C10H12 
(E. Bamberger, Ber., 1890, 23, p. 1561). The a-tetrahydro- 
naphthalene is formed when naphthalene is heated with phos- 
phonium iodide at i7o°-ioo (A. v. Baeyer). Structurally 
naphthalene may be represented as a fusion of two benzene 
nuclei, the hydrogen atoms being numbered as in the inset 
formula 


	:(x): ■> 1, 4, s, 

	8 are a-positions, 2, 3, 6, 7 are )3; 

	1-5 or 4-8 diderivatives are ana, whilst 1-8 or 4-5 are peri (see 
	Chemistry, Organic). 

a- Nitro naphthalene, CioH 7 *N02, is formed by the direct nitration of 
naphthalene. For its commercial preparation see O. Witt, Die 
chemische Industrie, 1887, 10, p. 215. It crystallizes ^ in yellow 
needles, which melt at 61 ° C, and are readily soluble in alcohol. 
By the action of nitro-sulphuric acid it is converted into a mixture 
of 1*5 and i-8 dinitronaphthalenes (P. Friedlander, Ber. t 1899,32, 
P* 353 1 )- When heated with aniline and its salts it yields pnenyl- 
rosindulin (German patent 67339 U888)). $-Nitronaphthalene is 
prepared by acting with ethyl nitrite on an alcohol^ solution of 
t 2-nitro-a-naphthylamine in the presence of sulphuric acid (E. Lell- 
' mann and A. Remy, Ber., 1886, 19, p. 237), or with freshly prepared 
potassium cupronitrite on 0-naphthalene diazonium sulphate 
(A. Hantzsch, Ber., 1900, 33, p. 2553), It crystallizes in small 
yellow needles which melt at 78 C. and are volatile in steam. 

Sulphonic Acids. — Two monosul phonic acids (a and 0) result by 
acting with sulphuric acid on the hydrocarbon, the a-acid pre- 
dominating at low temperatures (8o° C. and under) and the 0-acid 
at higher temperatures (i7o°-200° C). They are crystalline, hygro- 
scopic compounds and are employed for the^ manufacture of the 
naphthols. Numerous di- and tri-su\ phonic acids are known. 

a- Naphthoquinone, Ci H 6 O 2 , resembles benzoquinone, and is formed 
by the oxidation of many a-derivatives of naphthalene with chromic 
acid. It crystallizes in yellow needles which melt at 125 C. It 
sublimes readily, is volatile in steam and reduces to 
the corresponding dihydroxy naphthalene. ^Naphtho- 
quinone is formed by oxidizing 2 -a mino-a- naphthol 
(from/9-naphthol-orangeby reduction) withferric chlo- 
ride. It crystallizes in red needles, which melt at 1 15 
C; it has no smell and is non-volatile (cf. phenan- 
threnequinone).-4/jzariwWacfe,CioH4(OH)202*NaHSOa, 
the sodium bisulphite compound of 7*8 dioxy-a- 
naphthoquinone, is a dyestuff used for printing on 
cotton in the presence of a chromium mordant. 
The naphthoquinone is prepared^ by the action 
of zinc and concentrated sulphuric acid on a-di- 
nitronaphthalene. A 2-6 naphthoquinone results 
on oxidizing 2*6 dihydroxy naphthalene with lead 
peroxide. 

a-Naphthoic acid, GoHj-CC^H, is formed by hydro- 
lysis of the nitrile, obtained by distilling potassium- 
a-naphthalene sulphonate with potassium cyanide (V. 
Merz, Zeit.f. Chemie, 1868, p. 34), or by heating the 
sulphonatewithsodiumformate (V.Meyer, ^nn.,1870, 
156, p. 274). It forms^ needles which melt at 160 C. 
^-Naphthoic acid, obtained by boiling 0-methylnaph- 
thalene with dilute nitric acid, or by hydrolysis of 
its nitrile (formed when formyl-0-naphthalide is 
heated' with zinc dust), crystallizes from alcohol in needles which 
melt at 184 C. 


NAPHTHOLS, or Hydroxynaphthalenes, G0H7OH, the 
naphthalene homologues of the phenols. The hydroxyl group 
is more reactive than in the phenols, the naphthols being con- 
verted into naphthylamines by the action of ammonia, and 
forming ethers and esters much more readily. 

a-Naphthol may be prepared by fusing sodium-a-naphthalene 
sulphonate with caustic soda; by heating a-naphthylamine 
sulphate with water to 200 C. (English Patent 14301 (1892)); 
and by heating phenyl isocrotonic acid (R. Fittig and H. 
Erdmann, Ann. 1885, 227, p. 242): C 6 H 6 CH:CH-CH 2 -C02H 
= Ci H7OH+H 2 O. It forms colourless needles which melt at 
94 C; and is readily soluble in alcohol, ether, chloroform, 
and caustic alkalis. It is volatile in steam. With ferric 
chloride it gives a dark-blue precipitate of a-dinaphthol, 
HO-CioHe-CioHe'OH. Alkaline potassium permanganate oxi- 
dizes it to phenyl-glyoxyl-ortho-carboxylic acid, HOzC-CeHvCO 
C0 2 H. It is reduced by sodium in boiling amyl alcohol solution 
to " aromatic " tetrahydro-a-naphthol (reduction occurring in 
the ring which does not contain the hydroxyl group). When 
heated with hydrazine hydrate at 160 C. it gives a-naphthyl 
hydrazine, CioH 7 NH-NH2(L. Hoffmann, Ber., 1898, 31, p. 2909). 
Nitric acid converts it into nitro-compounds, which are occasion- 
ally used for dyeing silk and wool. 

Martius yellow, CioH6(N0 2 )20Na*H 2 0, the sodium salt of 2-4 
dinitro-a-naphthol^ (for notation see Naphthalene), is prepared 
by the action of nitric acid on a-naphthol-2*4-disulphonic acid. It 
forms orange-yellow plates and dyes wool a golden yellow (from an 
acid bath). Naphthol yellow S., CioH^ONaHNC^SOsNa, prepared 
by the action of nitric acid on a-naphthol-2*47-trisulphonic acid, 
is an orange- yellow powder which dyes wool and silk yellow (from 
an acid bath). 

Numerous mono-, di- and trisulphonic acids of a-naphthol are 
employed in the preparation of azo dyes. The most important is 
Nevile^ and Winther's acid, CioH c (OH)(SO s H)(i*4), formed when 
diazotized naphthionic acid (a-naphthylamine-4-sulphonic acid) is 
boiled with dilute sulphuric acid (Nevile and Winther, Ber., 1880, 
*3» P- *949)» or when sodium naphthionate is heated with concen- 
trated caustic soda solution under pressure at 240°-26o° C. (German 
patent 46307 (1888)). It melts at 170 C, and is readily soluble in 
water. With ferric chloride it gives a blue coloration; 

p-Naphthol, C10H7OH, prepared by fusing sodium 0-naphtha- 
lene sulphonate with caustic soda, crystallizes in plates which 
melt at 122 C. With ferric chloride it gives a green colouration, 
and after a time a white flocculent precipitate of a dinaphthol. 
With sodium in boiling amyl alcohol solution it gives a mixture 
of alicyclic and aromatic tetrahydro-/3-naphthols (E. Bamberger, 
Ber. , 1890, 23, p. 197). When heated with ammonium formate 
to 150° C. it forms j3-naphthylamine. With nitrosodimethy- 
laniline hydrochloride it forms Meldola's Blue (dimethylamino- 
naphthophenoxazonium chloride), C18H15N2OCI (R. Meldola, 
Ber., 1879, 12, p. 2065). 

The 0-naphthol sulphonic acids find extensive application in the 
colour industry. The most important members are shown in the 
table:— 

	Formula. 
	Method of Preparation. 
	Remarks. 

	2-oxy-8-sul phonic 
	(Baeyer's acid) 

	From /S- naphthol and concen- 
	trated sulphuric acid at 
	50°-6o° C. 

	Sodium salt soluble in 
	strong alcohol. 

	2 -oxy-6-sul phonic 
	(Schaffer's acid) 

	From 0-naphthol and concen- 
	trated sulphuric at 100 C. 

	Sodium salt insoluble in 
	alcohol. 

	2-oxy-7-sul phonic 
	(F-acid) 

	By fusion of naphthalene 2*7- 
	disulphonic acid with caustic 
	soda at 200°-250° C. 

	Very soluble in water 
	and alcohol. 

	2-oxy-3*6-disulphonic 
	(R-acid) 

	Both R- and G-acid from 0- 
	naphthol and concentrated 
	sulphuric acid at 100 - 
	iio°C. 

	The sodium salts separ- 
	ated by crystalliza- 
	tion. R-salt insoluble 
	in alcohol ; G-salt 
	soluble. 

	2-oxy-6*8-disul phonic 
	(G-aeid) 

	2-oxy-3*6-8-trisulphonic 

	From 0-naphthol and fuming 
	sulphuric acid at I40°-i6o°C. 

	Alkaline solutions show 
	green fluorescence. 

Nitrosonaphthols or naphthoquinone-oximes, GoH 8 (OH)(NO) or 
CioH«(:NOH):0. Two are known, namely ^-nitroso-a-naphthol or 
a-naphthoquinone-oxime, formed by the action of nitrous acid on 
o-naphthol or .of hydroxylamine hydrochloride on o-naphthoquinone 
(H. Goldschmidt and H. Schmidt, Ber., 1884, 17 p. 2064); and 
2-mtroso-a-naphthol(fi-naphthoquinone-oxime), formed by the action 
of hydroxylamine hydrochloride on ^-naphthoquinone, 


NAPHTHYLAMINES, or Aminonaphthalenes, C10H7NH2, 
the naphthalene homologues of aniline, in contrast to which 
they may be prepared by heating the naphthols with ammonia- 
zinc chloride. 

a-Naphthylamine is prepared by reducing a-nitronaphthalene 
with iron and hydrochloric acid at about 70 C, the reaction 
mixture being neutralized with milk of lime, and the naphthy- 
lamine steam-distilled. It may also be prepared (in the form of 
its acetyl derivative) by heating a-naphthol with sodium acetate, 
ammonium chloride and acetic acid (A. Calm, Ber., 1882, 15, 
p. 616); by heating a-naphthol with calcium chloride-ammonia 
to 270 C; and by heating pyromucic acid, aniline, zinc chloride 
and lime to 300 C. (F. Canzonieri and V. Oliveri, Gazz., 1886, 16, 
P- 493)- It crystallizes in colourless needles which melt at 50° C. 
It possesses a disagreeable faecal odour, sublimes readily, and 
turns brown on exposure to air. Oxidizing agents (ferric 
chloride, &c.) give a blue precipitate with solutions of its salts. 
Chromic acid converts it into a-naphthoquinone. Sodium in boil- 
ing amyl alcohol reduces it to aromatic tetrahydro-a-naphthyl- 
amine, a substance having the properties of an aromatic amine, 
for it can be diazotized and does not possess an ammoniacal 
smell. Since it does not form an addition product with bromine, 
reduction must have taken place in one of the nuclei only, and 
on account of the aromatic character of the compound it must be 
in that nucleus which does not contain the amino group. This 
tetrahydro compound yields adipic acid, (CH 2 )4(C02H) 2 , when 
oxidized by potassium permanganate. The a-naphthylamine 
sulphonic acids are used for the preparation of azo dyes, these 
dyes possessing the important property of dyeing unmordanted 
cotton. The most important is naphtkionic acid, i-amino-4- 
sulphonic acid, produced by heating a-naphthylamine and 
sulphuric acid to 170-180 C. with about 3% of crystallized 
oxalic acid. It forms small needles, very sparingly soluble in 
water. With diazotized benzidine it gives Congo red. 

ft-Naphlhylamine is prepared by heating jS-naphthol with zinc 
chloride-ammonia to 200-210 (V. Merz and W. Weith, Ber., 
1880, 13, 1300); or in the form of its acetyl derivative by 
heating jS-naphthol with ammonium acetate to 270-280 C. 
It forms odourless, colourless plates which melt at m-112 C. 
It gives no colour with ferric chloride. When reduced by sodium 
in boiling amyl alcohol solution it forms alicyclic tetrahydro-)?- 
naphthylamine, which has most of the properties of the aliphatic 
amines; it is strongly alkaline in reaction, has an ammoniacal 
odour and cannot be diazotized. On oxidation it yields 
ortho-carboxy-hydrocinnamic acid, K^C^HrCHj-CHj-^H. 
Numerous sulphonic acids derived from jS-naphthylamine are 
known, the more important of which are the 2-8 or Badische, 
the 2*5 or Dahl, the 2-7 or 5, and the 2-6 or Bronner acid. Of 
these, the 5-acid and Bronner's acid are of more value technically, 
since they combine with ortho-tetrazoditolyl to produce fine red 
dye-stuffs. 


NAPIER, SIR CHARLES (1786-1860), British admiral, was 
the second son of Captain the Hon. Charles Napier, R.N., and 
grandson of Francis, fifth Lord Napier. He was born at 
Merchiston Hall, near Falkirk, on the 6th of March 1786. He 
became a midshipman in 1800, and was promoted lieutenant 
in 1805. He was appointed to the " Courageux " (74), and was 
present in her at the action in which the squadron under Sir J. B. 
Warren took the French " Marengo " (80) and " Belle Poule " 
(40) ,^ on the 13th of March 1806 in the West Indies. After re- 
turning home with Warren he went back to the West Indies in the 
" St George " and was appointed acting commander of the 
"Pultusk" brig. The rank was confirmed on the 30th of 
November 1807. In August 1808 he was moved into the " Re- 
cruit 'j (18), and in her fought an action with the " Diligent " 
(18), in which his thigh was broken. In April 1809 he took 
part in the capture of the " Hautpoult " (74), and was promoted 
acting post captain. His rank was confirmed, but he was put on 
half-pay, when he came home with a convoy. He spent some time 
at the university of Edinburgh, and then went to Portugal to 
visit his cousins in Wellington's army. In 18 n he served in 
the Mediterranean, and in 18 13 on the coast of America and in the 
expedition up the Potomac. The first years of his leisure, he 
spent in Italy and in Paris, but speculated so much in a steamboat 
enterprise that by 1827 he was quite ruined. In that year he was 
appointed to the " Galatea " (42), and was at the Azores when 
they were held by the count de Villa Flor for the queen of 
Portugal. He so much impressed the constitutional leaders that 
they begged him to take command of the fleet, which offer he 
accepted in February 1833. With it he destroyed the Miguelite 
fleet off Cape St Vincent on July 5, and on the demand of 
France was struck off the English navy list. Continuing his 
Portuguese services, he commanded theland forces on the success- 
ful defence of Lisbon in 1834, when he was made Grand Com- 
mander of the Tower and Sword, and Count Cape St Vincent in 
the peerage of Portugal. On his return to England he was re- 
stored to his former rank in the navy 1836, and received 
command of the " Powerful " (84), in 1838. When troubles 
broke out in Syria he was appointed second in command, and 
distinguished himself by leading the storming column at Sidon on 
September 26, 1840, and by other services, for which he was made 
a K.C.B. He went on half-pay in 184 1, and was in 1842 elected 
M.P. for Marylebone in the Liberal interest, but lost his seat in 
184(5. He was promoted rear-admiral the same year, and com- 
manded the Channel fleet from 1846 to 1848. On the outbreak of 
the Russian War he received the command of the fleet destined 
to act in the Baltic, and hoisted his flag in February 1854. 
He refused to attack Cronstadt, and a great outcry was raised 
against him for not obeying the orders of the Admiralty and 
attempting to storm the key of St Petersburg; but his inaction 
has been thoroughly justified by posterity. On his return in 
December 1854 he was not again offered a command. He was 
elected M.P. for Southwark in February 1855, and maintained 
his seat, though broken in health, until his death on the 6th of 
November i860. Sir Charles Napier was a man of undoubted 
energy and courage, but of no less eccentricity and vanity. 
He caused great offence to many of his brother officers by his 
behaviour to his superior, Admiral Stopford, in the Syrian War, 
and was embroiled all his life in quarrels with the Admiralty. 

See Major-General E. Napier's Life and Correspondence of Admiral 
Sir Charles Napier, K.C.B. (2 vols., London, 1862); Napier's own 
War in Syria (2 vols., 1842); The Navy: its past and present state, 
in a series of letters, edited by Sir W. F. P. Napier (1851); and 
The History of the Baltic Campaign of^ 1854, from documents and ' 
other materials furnished by Vice-Admiral Sir C. Napier, K.C.B. 
(1857). See also The Life and Exploits of Commodore Napier (1841) ; 
and Life of Vice-Admiral Sir C. Napier (1854). 


NAPIER, SIR CHARLES JAMES (1782-1853), British soldier 
and statesman, was born at Whitehall, London, in 1782, being 
the eldest son of Colonel George Napier (a younger son of the 
fifth lord Napier), and of his wife, the Lady Sarah Lennox 
who had charmed King George III. After the custom of those 
times Charles Napier had been gazetted an ensign in the 33rd 
regiment in 1794, and in 1797 his father secured for him the 
appointment of aide-de-camp to Sir James Duff, commanding 
the Limerick district. Longing for more active service, Napier 
obtained a commission as lieutenant in the 95th Manningham's 
Rifles (Rifle Brigade) in 1800. This newly formed corps was 
designed to supply a body of light troops for the English army 
fit to cope with the French voltigeurs.and tirailleurs, and was 
specially trained, at first under the eye of Colonel Coote Manning- 
ham, and then at Shorncliffe under the immediate supervision 
of -Sir John Moore. Moore speedily perceived the military 
qualities of the Napiers, and inspired the three brothers — 
Charles of the Rifles, George of the 52nd and William of the 
43rd — with an enthusiasm which lasted all their lives; but, 
though happy in his general, Charles Napier quarrelled bitterly 
with William Stewart, the lieutenant-colonel, and in 1803 left 
the regiment to accompany General H. E. Fox to Ireland as 
aide-de-camp. The great influence of his uncle x the duke 0* 
Richmond, and of his cousins, Charles James Fox and the general, 
procured him in 1804 a captaincy in the staff corps, and in the 
beginning of 1806 a majority in the Cape regiment. On his way 
to the Cape, however, he exchanged into the 50th regiment, 
with which he served in the short Danish campaign under Lord 
Cathcart in 1807. Shortly after his return from Denmark the 
50th was ordered to Portugal, and in command of it Napier 
shared all the glories of the famous retreat to Corunna. At the 
battle of Corunna, one of the last sights of Sir John Moore before 
he fell mortally wounded was the advance of his own old regiment 
under the command of Charles Napier and Edward Stanhope, 
and almost his last words were " Well done, my majors!" The 
50th suffered very severely and both the majors were left Tor dead 
upon the field. Napier's life was saved by a French drummer 
named Guibert, who brought him safely to the headquarters 
of Marshal Soult. Soult treated him with the greatest kindness, 
and he was allowed by Ney to return to England to his " old 
blind mother " instead of being interned. After about a year 
he heard that his exchange had been arranged, and, volunteering 
for the Peninsula, he joined the light division before Ciudad 
Rodrigo. As a volunteer he served in the actions on the Coa, 
and again at Busaco, where he was badly wounded in the face. 
He was ordered to England, but refused to go, and in March 181 1, 
though barely recovered, he hurried to the front to take part 
in the pursuit of Massena. After the battle of Fuentes d'Onor, 
he received the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 102nd regiment, 
which had become entirely demoralized at Botany Bay, and when 
he joined it at Guernsey in 181 1 was one of the worst regiments 
in the service. When he left it in 1813 it was one of the best. 
He accompanied it in June 181 2 from Guernsey to Bermuda, 
where he wrought a wonderful change in the spirit both of officers 
and men. By treating his men as friends he won their love and 
admiration, and became in a peculiar degree the hero of the 
British soldiers. After seeing further active service against the 
United States in September 1813 he exchanged back into the 
50th regiment, and in December 18 14, believing all chance of 
active service to be at an end, went on half-pay'. He was gazetted 
one of the first C.B.'s on the extension of the order of the Bath 
in 18 14, and was present as a volunteer at the capture of Cambray, 
but he just missed the great battle of Waterloo. Though an 
officer of some experience and more than thirty years of age, 
he now entered the military college at Farnham, and completed 
his military education. In 1810 he was appointed inspecting 
field officer at Corfu, in 1820 was sent on a mission to Ali Pasha 
at Iannina, and in 182 1 visited Greece, where he became an ardent 
supporter of the patriot party. From Corfu he was moved in 
1822 to Cephalonia, where he remained for eight years as governor 
and military resident. He was the model of an absolute colonial 
governor, and showed all the qualities of a benevolent despot. 
He made good roads and founded great institutions, but every- 
thing must be done by him, and he showed himself averse to 
interference, whether from the high commissioner of the Ionian 
Islands, whom it was his duty to obey, or from the feudal magnates 
of his own little colony, over whom it was his duty to exercise 
strict supervision. An interesting episode in his command was 
his communication with Lord Byron when he touched at 
Cephalonia on his way to take part in the Greek War of Inde- 
pendence. Byron sent a letter to the Greek committee in London 
recommending Napier's appointment as commander-in-chief. 
But after many negotiations the scheme came to nothing. 
In 1827 Napier, who had two years before been made a colonel 
in the army, quarrelled with Sir Frederick Adam, the new high 
commissioner, and in 1830, when Napier was in England on leave, 
Adam seized his papers and forbade him to return. Napier 
-thereupon, refusing promotion to the residency of Zante, retired 
in disgust, living for some years in the south of England and, 
after the death of his wife in 1833, in Normandy. Here he wrote 
his work on the colonies, and also an historical romance on 
'William the Conqueror. Another work, entitled Harold, has 
disappeared. In 1834 he refused the governorship of Australia, 
still hoping for military employment. In 1S37 he was promoted 
major-general with his brother George, in 1838 he returned to 
England and was made a K.C.B.; but he was to wait till 1839 
before he received an offer of employment. In that year he was 
made commanding officer in the northern district, and found his 
command no sinecure, owing to the turbulent state of the 
Chartists in the towns of Yorkshire, Lancashire and the Midlands. 
His behaviour during the tenure of his command is described 
by William Napier in his life of his brother, and his inability to 
hold a command which did not carry supreme authority is plainly 
portrayed. In this particular instance his sympathies were 
on the popular side, and, though he maintained law and order 
with the necessary rigour, he resigned as soon as the crisis had 
passed, and went to India. He was stationed at Poona, and 
in September 1842, when troubles were expected there, was 
ordered to Sind. 

His command in Sind from 1842 till August 1847 is the period 
of his life during which, according to his brother, he made good 
his title to fame, but his acts, more especially at first, have been 
most severely criticized. There can be little doubt that from 
the moment he landed in the province he determined to conquer 
the amirs, and to seek the first opportunity of doing so. He 
was to be accompanied by James Outram (y.tf.), who had been 
resident in Sind during the Afghan War, and who felt a great 
admiration for him, but who had also a warm affection for the 
amirs, and believed that he could put off the day of their destruc- 
tion. On the 15th of February 1843, Outram was treacherously 
assailed at Hyderabad, and on the 17th Napier attacked the 
Baluch army 30,000 strong with but 2800 men. With these 
2800 men, including the 22nd regiment, which would do anything 
for him, he succeeded in winning the brilliant and decisive 
victory of Meeanee, one of the most amazing in the history of 
the British army, in which generals had to fight like privates, 
and Sir Charles himself engaged in the fray. In the March 
following, after marching without transport in the most intense 
heat, he finally destroyed the army of the amirs at the battle 
of Hyderabad. His success was received with enthusiasm both 
by the governor-general, Lord Ellenborough, and by the English 
people, and he was at once made a G.C.B. Whether or not the 
conquest of Sind at that particular period can be justified, 
there can be no doubt that Charles Napier was the best adminis- 
trator who could be found for the province when conquered. 
Sind, when it came under English rule, was in a state of utter 
anarchy, for the Baluchis had formed a military government 
not unlike that of the Mamelukes in Egypt, which had been 
extremely tyrannical to the native population. This native 
population was particularly protected by Sir Charles Napier, 
who completed the work of the destruction of the Baluch 
supremacy which he had commenced with the victory of Meeanee. 
The labour of administration was rendered more difficult by the 
necessity of repressing the hill tribes, which had been encour- 
aged to acts of lawlessness by the licence which followed the 
Afghan War. The later years of his administration were made 
very stormy by the attacks on the policy of the conquest which 
had been made in England. He left Sind, after quarrelling with 
every authority of the presidency of Bombay, and nearly every 
authority of the whole of India, in August 1847, and received a 
perfect ovation on his return from all the hero- worshippers 
of the Napiers, of whom there were many in England. His short 
stay in England was occupied with incessant struggles with the 
directors of the East India Company; but the news of the 
indecisive victory of Chillianwalla created a panic in England, 
and the East India Company was obliged by puhlic opinion to 
summon the greatest general of the day to command its armies. 
Sir Charles started almost at a moment's notice, but on reaching 
India found that the victory of Gujrat had been won and the 
Sikh War was over. No taint of envy was in his nature, and he 
rejoiced that he had not had to supersede Lord Gough in the 
moment of defeat. His restless and imperious spirit was met 
by one equally imperious in the governor-general, Lord Dalhousie. 
The two men were good friends until, in the absence of Dalhousie 
at sea, Napier took upon himself to alter the regulations regarding 
the allowances to native troops; the occasion was urgent, as 
the troops were in a state of mutiny, but on his return Dalhousie 
reprimanded the commander-in-chief and reversed his decision. 
Napier immediately handed in his resignation, and when the 
duke of Wellington supported Lord Dalhousie and repeated the 
reprimand he returned to England. He had been credited 
with foreseeing the Mutiny of 1857, and on the whole with 
justice. On one occasion he wrote that mutiny was " one of the 
greatest, if not the greatest, danger threatening India — a danger 
that may come unexpectedly, and if the first symptoms be not 
carefully treated, with a power to shake Leadenhall." On the 
mutiny of the 66th native regiment at Govindgarh he disbanded 
it, and handed its colours over to a Gurkha regiment, thus 
showing that he distrusted the high-class Brahman, and recognized 
the necessity of relying upon a more warlike and more disciplined 
race. His constitution was undermined by the Indian climate, 
especially by his fatiguing command in Sind, and on the 29th 
of August 1853 he died at Portsmouth. The bronze statue 
of him by G. G. Adams, which stands in Trafalgar Square, 
London, was erected by public subscription, by far the greater 
number of the subscribers being, as the inscription records, 
private soldiers. 

The chief authority for Sir Charles Napier's life is his Life and 
Opinions by his brother (1857); consult also MacColI, Career and 
Character of C. J. Napier (1857); M'Dougall, General Sir C. J. 
Napier, Conqueror and Governor of Scinde (i860); W. N. Bruce, 
Sir Charles Napier (1855); and T. R. E. Holmes, Four Famous 
Soldiers (1889). His own works are Memoir on the Roads of Cepha- 
Ionia (1825) ; The Colonies, treating of their value generally and of the 
Ionian Islands in particular; Strictures on the Administration of 
Sir F. Adam (1833); Colonization , particularly in Southern Australia 
O835); Remarks on Military Law and the Punishment of Flogging 
(1837); A Dialogue on the Poor Laws (1838?); A Letter on the De- 
fence of England by Corps of Volunteers and Militia (1852); Lights 
and Shadows of Military Life (trans, from the French, 1840); and 
A Letter to the Right Honourable Sir /. C. Hobhouse on the Baggage 
of the Indian Army (1849) ; Defects, Civil and Military, of the Indian 
Government (1853); William the Conqueror, a Historical Romance, 
edited by Sir W. Napier (1858). On Sind, consult primarily Sir 
W. Napier, The Conquest of Scinde (1845); The Administration of 
Scinde (1851) ; Compilation of General Orders issued by Sir C. Napier 
(!850); and Out ram, The Conquest of Scinde, a Commentary (18^.6). 
For his command-in-chief, and the controversy about his resignation, 
consult J. Mawson, Records of the Indian Command of General Sir 
C. /. Napier (Calcutta, 1851); Minutes on the Resignation of the late 
General Sir C. Napier, by Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington, &c. 
(1854); Comments by Sir W. Napier on a Memorandum of the Duke 
of Wellington (1854); Sir William Napier, General Sir C. Napier 
and the Directors of the East India Company (1857); Sir W. Lee 

Warner, Life of Lord Dalhousie (1904), 


NAPIER, JOHN (1550-1617), Scottish mathematician and 
inventor of logarithms, was born at Merchiston near Edinburgh 
in 1550, and was the eighth Napier of Merchiston. The first 
Napier of Merchiston, " Alexander Napare," acquired the 
Merchiston estate before the year 1438, from James I. of Scotland. 
He was provost of Edinburgh in r437, and was otherwise dis- 
tinguished. His eldest son Alexander, who succeeded him in 
1454, was provost of Edinburgh in 1455, 1457 and 1469; he 
was knighted and held various important court offices under 
successive monarchs; at the time of his death in 1473 he was 
master of the household to James III. His son, John Napier 
of Rusky, the third of Merchiston, belonged to the royal household 
in the lifetime of his father. He also was provost of Edinburgh 
at various times, and it is a remarkable instance of the esteem 
in which the lairds of Merchiston were held that three of them 
in immediate lineal succession repeatedly filled so important an 
office during perhaps the most memorable period in the history 
of the city. He married a great-granddaughter of Duncan, 
8th earl of Levenax (or Lennox), and besides this relationship 
by marriage the Napiers claimed a lineal male cadency from the 
ancient family of Levenax. His eldest son, Archibald Napier 
of Edinbellie, the fourth of Merchiston, belonged to the house- 
hold of James IV. He fought at Flodden and escaped with his 
life, but his eldest son Alexander, (fifth of Merchiston) was killed. 
Alexander's eldest son (Alexander, sixth of Merchiston) was born 
in 1513, and fell at the battle of Pinkie in 1547. His eldest son 
was Archibald, seventh of Merchiston, and the father of John 
Napier, the subject of this article. 

In 1549 Archibald Napier, at the early age of about fifteen, 
married Janet, daughter of Francis Bothwell, and in the following 
year John Napier was born. In the criminal court of Scotland, 
the earl of Argyll, hereditary justice-general of the kingdom, 
sometimes presided in person, but more frequently he delegated 
his functions; and it appears that in 1561 Archibald Napier 
was appointed one of the justice-deputes. In the register of 
the court, extending over 1563 and 1564, the justice-deputes 
named are " Archibald Naper of Merchistoune, Alexander 
Bannatyne, burgess of Edinburgh, James Stirling of Keir and 
Mr Thomas Craig." About 1565 he was knighted at the same 
time as James Stirling, his colleague, whose daughter John 
Napier subsequently married. In 1582 Sir Archibald was 
appointed master of the mint in Scotland, with the sole charge 
of superintending the mines and minerals within the realm, and 
this office he held till his death in 1608. His first wife died in 
1563, and in 1572 he married a cousin, Elizabeth Mowbray, 
by whom he had three sons, the eldest of whom was named 
Alexander. 1 

As already stated, John Napier was born in 1550, the year 
in which the Reformation in Scotland may be said to have 
commenced. In 1563, the year in which his mother died, he 
matriculated at St Salvator's College, St Andrews. He early 
became a Protestant champion, and the one extant anecdote 
of his youth occurs in his address " to the Godly and Christian 
reader " prefixed to his Plaine Discovery. He writes: — 

"In my tender yeares, and barneage in Sanct-Androis at the 
Schooles, having, on the one parte, contracted a loving familiaritie 
with a certaine Gentleman, &c. a Papist; And on the other part, 
being attentive to the sermons of that worthie man of God, Maister 
Christopher Goodman, teaching upon the Apocalyps, I was so mooved 
in admiration, against the blindnes of Papists, that could not most 
evidently see their seven hilled citie Rome, painted out there so 
lively by Saint John, as the mother of all spiritual whoredome, that 
not onely bursted I out in continual reasoning against my said 
familiar, but also from thenceforth, I determined with my selfe (by 
the assistance of Gods spirit) to employ my studie and diligence to 
search out the remanent mysteries of that holy Book: as to this 
houre (praised be the Lorde) I have bin doing at a I such times as 
conveniently I might have occasion." 

The names of nearly all Napier's classfellows can be traced 
as becoming determinants in 1566 and masters of arts in 1568; 
but his own name does not appear in the lists. The necessary 
inference is that his stay at the university was short, and that 
only the groundwork of his education was laid there. Although 
there is no direct evidence of the fact, there can be no doubt 
that he left St Andrews to complete his education abroad, and 
that he probably studied at the* university of Paris, and visited 
Italy and Germany. He did not, however, as has been supposed, 
spend the best years of his manhood abroad, for he was certainly 
at home in 1571, when the preliminaries of his marriage were 
arranged at Merchiston; and in 1572 he married Elizabeth, 
daughter of Sir James Stirling of Keir. About the end of the 
year 1579 his wife died, leaving him one son, Archibald (who in 
1627 was raised to the peerage by the title of Lord Napier), 
and one daughter, Jane. A few years afterwards he married 
again, his second wife being Agnes, daughter of Sir James 

	1 The descent of the first Napier of Merchiston has been traced to 
	" Johan le Naper del Counte de Dunbretan/' who was one of those 
	who swore fealty^ to # Edward I. in 1296 and defended the castle of 
	Stirling against him in 1304; but there is no authority for this genea- 
	logy. The legend with regard to the origin of the name Napier was 
	given by Sir Alexander Napier, eldest son of John Napier, in 1625, in 
	these words: " One of the ancient earls of Lennox in Scotland had 
	issue three sons: the eldest, that succeeded him to the earldom of 
	Lennox; the second, whose name was Donald; and the third, named 
	Gilchrist. The then king of Scotland having wars, did convocate his 
	lieges to battle, amongst whom that was commanded was the earl of 
	Lennox, who, keeping his eldest son at home, sent his two sons to 
	serve for him with the forces that were under his command. . . . 
	After the battle, as the manner is, every one drawing and setting 
	forth his own acts, the king said unto them, ye have all done valiantly, 
	but there is one amongst you who hath Na-Peer (i.e. no equal) ; 
	and calling Donald into his presence commanded him, in regard to 
	his worthy service, and in augmentation of his honour, to change 
	his name from Lennox to Napier, and gave him the lands of Gosford, 
	and lands in Fife, and made him his own servant, which discourse is 
	confirmed by evidences of mine, wherein we are called Lennox alias 
	Napier." 

	Chisholm of Cromlix, who survived him. By her he had five 
	sons and five daughters. 

	In 1588 he was chosen by the presbytery of Edinburgh one 
	of its commissioners to the General Assembly. 

On the 17th of October 1593 a convention of delegates was 
held at Edinburgh at which a committee was appointed to follow 
the king and lay before him in a personal interview certain 
instructions relating to the punishment of the rebellious Popish 
earls and the safety of the church. This committee consisted of 
six members, two barons, two ministers and two burgesses — 
the two barons selected being John Napier of Merchiston and 
James Maxwell of Calderwood. The delegates found the king at 
Jedburgh, and the mission, which was a dangerous one, was 
successfully accomplished. Shortly afterwards another con- 
vention was held at Edinburgh, and it was resolved that the 
delegates sent to Jedburgh should again meet the king at Lin- 
lithgow and repeat their former instructions. This was done 
accordingly, the number of members of the committee being, 
however, doubled. These interviews took place in October 
1593, and on the 29th of the following January Napier wrote 
to the king the letter which forms the dedication of the Plaine 
Discovery, 

The full title of this first work of Napier's is given below. 1 
It was written in English instead of Latin in order that " hereby 
the simple of this Hand may be instructed "; and the author 
apologizes for the language and his own mode of expression in 
the following sentences: — 

11 Whatsoever therfore through hast, is here rudely and in base 
language set downe, I doubt not to be pardoned thereof by all 
good men, who, considering the necessitie of this time, will esteem 
it more meete to make hast to prevent the rising againe of Anti- 
christ ian darknes within this Hand, then to prolong the time in 
painting of language "; and " I graunt indeede, and am sure, that 
in the style of wordes and utterance of language, we shall greatlie 
differ, for therein I do judge my selfe inferiour to all men: so that 
scarcely in these high matters could I with long deliberation finde 
wordes to expresse my minde." 2 

Napier's Plaitie Discovery is a serious and laborious work, to 
which he had devoted years of care and thought. In one sense 
it may be said to stand to theological literature in Scotland in 
something of the same position as that occupied by the Canon 
Mirificus with respect to the scientific literature, for it is the first 
published original work relating to theological interpretation, 
and is quite without a predecessor in its own field. Napier lived 
in the very midst of fiercely contending religious factions; there 
was but little theological teaching of any kind, and the work 
related to what were then the leading political and religious 
questions of the day. 

	1 A Plaine Discovery of the whole Revelation of Saint Iohn: set 
	downe in two treatises: The one searching and proving the true inter- 
	pretation thereof: The other applying the same paraphrastically and 
	historically to the text. Set foorth by John Napier L. of Marchistoun 
	younger. Whereunto are annexed certaine Oracles of Sibylla, agreeing 
	with the Revelation and other places of Scripture. Edinburgh, printed 
	by Robert Walde-gravej printer to the King's Majestie y 1593. Cum 
	privilegio Regali. 

	2 A Dutch translation was published at Middelburg in 1600 and a 
	second edition in 1607. The work was translated into French by 
	George Thomson, a naturalized Scotsman residing in La Rochelle, 
	and published by him at that town in 1602, under the title Ouverture 
	de tons les secrets de V Apocalypse. . . . Par Jean Napeir (c. a. d.) 
	Nonpareil, Sieur de Merchiston, reveue par lui-mesme, et mise en 
	Francois par Georges Thomson, Escossois. Subsequent editions were 
	published in 1603, 1605 and 1607. German translations were pub- 
	ished at Gerain 1611 and at Frankfort in 1605 and 1627. The 
	second edition in English appeared at Edinburgh in 1611, and in the 
	preface to it Napier states he intended to have published an edition 
	in Latin soon after the original publication in 1593, but that, as the 
	work had now been made public by the French and Dutch trans- 
	lations, besides the English editions, and as he was " advertised 
	that our papistical adversaries wer to write larglie against the said 
	editions that are alreadie set out," he defers the Latin edition " till 
	having first seene the adversaries objections, I may insert in the Latin 
	edition an apologie of that which is rightly done, and an amends of 
	whatsoever is amisse." No criticism on the work was published, 
	and there was no Latin edition- A third edition appeared at Edin- 
	burgh in 1645. Corresponding to the first two Edinburgh editions, 
	copies were issued bearing the London imprint and dates 1594 and 
	1611. 

After the publication of the Plaine Discovery », Napier seems to 
have occupied himself with the invention of secret instruments of 
war, for in the Bacon collection at Lambeth Palace there is a 
document, dated the 7th of June 1596 and signed by Napier, 
giving a list of his inventions for the defence of the country 
against the anticipated invasion by Philip of Spain. The docu- 
ment is entitled " Secrett Inventionis, proffitabill and necessary 
in theis dayes for defence of this Hand, and withstanding of 
strangers, enemies of God's truth and religion," 3 and the in- 
ventions consist of (1) a mirror for burning the enemies' ships 
at any distance, (2) a piece of artillery destroying everything 
round an arc of a circle, and (3) a round metal chariot, so con- 
structed that its occupants could move it rapidly and easily, 
while firing out through small holes in it. It has been asserted 
(by Sir Thomas Urquhart) that the piece of artillery was actually 
tried upon a plain in Scotland with complete success, a number 
of sheep and cattle being destroyed. % 

In 1614 appeared the work which in the history of British 
science can be placed as second only to Newton's Principia. 
The full title is as follows: Mirifici Logaritkmorum Canonis 
description Ejusque usus, in utraque Trigonometria; ut eliam in 
omni Logistica Mathematical Amplissimi f Facillimi, & expeditis- 
sitni explication Authore ac Inventor e Ioanne Nepero, Bar one 
Merchistonii, &*c, Scoto. Edinburgh ex officind Andreae Hart 
Bibliopolae } CID.DC.XIV. This is printed on an ornamental 
title-page. The work is a small-sized quarto, containing fifty- 
seven pages of explanatory matter and ninety pages of tables. 

The nature of logarithms is explained by reference to the 
motion of points in a straight line, and the principle upon which 
they are based is that of the correspondence of a geometrical 
and an arithmetical series of numbers. The table gives the 
logarithms of sines for every minute to seven figures. This work 
contains the first announcement of logarithms to the world, the 
first table of logarithms and the first use of the name logarithm, 
which was invented by Napier. 

In 1617 Napier published his Rabdologia,* a duodecimo of one 
hundred and fifty-four pages; there is prefixed to it as preface 
a dedicatory epistle to the high chancellor of Scotland. The 
method which Napier terms " Rabdologia " consists in the use 
of certain numerating rods for the performance of multiplica- 
tions and divisions. These rods, which were commonly called 
" Napier's bones," will be described further on. The second 
method, which he calls the " Promptuarium Multiplicationis " on 
account of its being the most expeditious of all for the perform- 
ance of multiplications, involves the use of a number of lamellae 
or little plates of metal disposed in a box. In an appendix of 
forty-one pages he gives his third method, "local arithmetic," 
which is performed on a chess-board, and depends, in principle, 
on the expression of numbers in the scale of radix 2. In the 
Rabdologia he gives the chronological order of his inventions. 
He speaks of the canon of logarithms as " a me longo tempore 
elaboratum." The other three methods he devised for the sake 
of those who would prefer to work with natural numbers; and 
he mentions that the promptuary was his latest invention. In 
the preface to the appendix containing the local arithmetic 
he states that, while devoting all his leisure to the invention of 
these abbreviations of calculation, and to examining by what 
methods the toil of calculation might be removed, in addition 
to the logarithms, rabdologia and promptuary, he had hit upon 
a certain tabular arithmetic, whereby the more "troublesome 
operations of common arithmetic are performed on an abacus 
or chess-board, and which may be regarded as an amusement 

	8 A facsimile of this document is given by Mark Napier in his 
	Memoirs of John Napier (1834), p. 248. 

	4 Rabdologiae, seu Numerationis per virgulas Libri duo: Cum 
	Appendice de expeditissimo Multiplicationis promptuario. Quibus 
	accessit & Arithmeticae Localis Liber unus. Authore &• Inventore 
	Ioanne Neper 0, Bar one Merchistonii, &c, Scoto. Edinburgi, Excu- 
	debat Andreas Hart (16 17). Foreign editions were published in Italian 
	at Verona in 1623, in Latin at Leiden in 1626 and 1628, and in Dutch 
	at Gouda in 1626. In 1623 Ursinus published Rhabdologia Neperiana 
	at Berlin, and the rods or bones were described in several other 
	works. 

rather than a labour, for, by means of it, addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, division and even the extraction of roots are 
accomplished simply by the motion of counters. He adds that 
he has appended it to the Rabdologia, in addition to the promp- 
tuary, because he did not wish to bury it in silence nor to publish 
so small a matter by itself. With respect to the calculating rods, 
he mentions in the dedication that they had already found so 
much favour as to be almost in common use, and even to have 
been carried to foreign countries; and that he has been advised 
to publish his little work relating to their mechanism and use, 
lest they should be put forth in some one else's name. 

John Napier died on the 4th of April 161 7, the same year 
as that in which the Rabdologia was published. His will, which 
is extant, was signed on the fourth day before his death. 
No particulars are known of his last illness, but it seems likely 
that death came upon him rather suddenly at last. In both the 
Canonis descriptio and the Rabdologia, however, he makes refer- 
ence to his ill-health. In the dedication of the former he refers 
to himself as " mini jam morbis pene confecto," and in the 
" Admonitio " at the end he speaks of his " infirma valetudo "; 
while in the latter he says he has been obliged to leave the 
calculation of the new canon of logarithms to others "ob in- 
firmam corporis nostri valetudinem." 

It has been usually supposed that John Napier was buried in 
St Giles's church, Edinburgh, which was certainly the burial- 
place of some of the family, but Mark Napier {Memoirs, p. 426) 
quotes Professor William Wallace, who, writing in 1832, gives 
strong reasons for believing that he was buried in the old church 
of St Cuthbert. 

Professor Wallace's words are — 

" My authority for this belief is unquestionable. It is a Treatise 
on Trigonometry, by a Scotsman, James Hume of Godscroft, 
Berwickshire, a place still in possession of the family of Hume. 
The work in question, which is rare, was printed at Paris, and has the 
date 1636 on the title-page, but the royal privilege which secured 
it to the author is dated in October 1635, and it may have been 
written several years earlier. In his treatise (page 116) Hume 
says, speaking of logarithms, ' L'inuenteur estoit un Seigneur 
de grande condition, et duquel la posterity est aujourd'huy en 
possession de grandes dignitez dans le royaume, qui estant sur 
fage, et grandement trauaille* des gouttesne pouvait faire autre 
chose que de s'adonner aux sciences, et principalment aux mathc- 
matiques et a la logistique, a quoy il se plaisoit infiniment, et auec 
estrange peine, a construict ses Tables des Logarymes, imprimees 
a Edinbourg en Tan 1614. ... II mourut Tan 1616, et fut enterre" 
hors la Porte Occidcntale d'Edinbourg, dans l'Eglise de Sainct 
Cudbert.' " 

There can be no doubt that Napier's devotion to mathematics 
was not due to old age and the gout, and that he died in 161 7 
and not in 1616; still these sentences were written within eighteen 
years of Napier's death, and their author seems to have had 
some special sources of information. Additional probability is 
given to Hume's assertion by the fact that Merchiston is situated 
in St Cuthbert's parish. It is nowhere else recorded that Napier 
suffered from the gout. It has been stated that Napier's mathe- 
matical pursuits led him to dissipate his means. This is not so, 
for his will {Memoirs, p. 427) shows that besides his large estates 
he left a considerable amount of personal property. 

The Canonis Descriptio on its publication in 1614, at once 
attracted the attention of Edward Wright, whose name is known 
in connexion with improvements in navigation, and Henry 
Briggs, then professor of geometry at Gresham College, London. 
The former translated the work into English, but he died in 
1 61 5, and the translation was published by his son Samuel 
Wright in 1616. Briggs was greatly excited by Napier's invention 
and visited him at Merchiston in 161 5, staying with him a whole 
month; he repeated his visit in 1616 and, as he states, " would 
have been glad to make him a third visit if it had pleased God 
to spare him so long." The logarithms introduced by Napier 
in the Descriptio are not the same as those now in common use, 
nor even the same as those now called Napierian or hyperbolic 
logarithms. The change from the original logarithms to common 
or decimal logarithms was made by both Napier and Briggs, 
and the first tables of decimal logarithms were calculated by 
Briggs, who published a small table, extending to 1000, in 
1 61 7, and a large work, Arithmetica Logarithmica, 1 containing 
logarithms of numbers to 30,000 and from 90,000 to 100,000, in 
1624. (See Logarithm.) 

Napier's Descriptio of 1614 contains no explanation of the 
manner in which he had calculated his table. This account he 
kept back, as he himself states, in order to see from the reception 
met with by the Descriptio, whether it would be acceptable. 
Though written before the Descriptio it had not been prepared 
for press at the time of his death, but was published by his son 
Robert in 1619 under the title Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis 
Construction In this treatise (which was written before Napier 
had invented the name logarithm) logarithms are called " arti- 
ficial numbers.'* 

The different editions of the Descriptio and Constructio, as well 
as the reception of logarithms on the continent of Europe, and 
especially by Kepler, whose admiration of the invention almost 
equalled that of Briggs, belong to the history of logarithms {q.v.). 
It may, however, be mentioned here that an English translation 
of the Constructio of 1619 was published by W. R. Macdonald 
at Edinburgh in 1889, and that there is appended to this edition 
a complete catalogue of all Napier's writings, and their various 
editions and translations, English and foreign, all the works 
being carefully collated, and references being added to the 
various public libraries in which they are to be found. 

Napier's priority in the publication of the logarithms is un- 
questioned and only one other contemporary mathematician 
seems to have conceived the idea on which they depend. There 
is no anticipation or hint to be found in previous writers, 3 and it 
is very remarkable that a discovery or invention which was to 
exert so important and far-reaching an influence on astronomy 
and every science involving calculation was the work of a single 
mind. 

The more one considers the condition of science at the time, 
and the state of the country in which the discovery took place, 
the more wonderful does the invention of logarithms appear. 
When algebra had advanced to the point where exponents were 
introduced, nothing would be more natural than that their utility 
as a means of performing multiplications and divisions should be 
remarked; but it is one of the surprises in the history of science 
that logarithms were invented as an arithmetical improvement 
years before their connexion with exponents was known. It is 
to be noticed also that the invention was not the result of any 
happy accident. Napier deliberately set himself to abbreviate 
multiplications and divisions — operations of so fundamental a 
character that it might well have been thought that they were 
in rerum naiura incapable of abbreviation; and he succeeded in 
devising, by the help of arithmetic and geometry alone, the one 

	1 The title runs as follows: Arithmetica Logarithmica, sive Log- 
	arithmorum chiliades triginta. . . . Hos numeros primus invenit 
	clarissimus vir Iohannes Neperus Baro Merchistonij; eos autem ex 
	eiusdem sententia mutaviU eorumque ortum et usum Ulustravit Henricus 
	Briggius. . . . 

	J The full title was: Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Constructio; 
	Et eorum ad naturales ipsorum numeros habitudines; unh cum Appen- 
	dices de alid edque praestantiore Logarithmorum specie conaendd. 
	Quibus accessere Propositiones ad triangula sphaerica faciliore calculo^ 
	resolvenda: Un& cum Annotationibus aliquot doctissimi D. Henrici 
	Briggii, in eas & memoratam appendicem. Authore & Inventore 
	Joanne Nepero f Barone Merchistonti t &c. Scoto^ Edinburgi t Excude- 
	bat Andreas Hart, Anno Domini 161 9. There is also preceding this 
	title-page an ornamental title-page, similar to that of the Descriptio 
	of 1 6 14; the words are different, however, and .run — Mirifici 
	Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio . . . Accesserunl Opera Posthuma: 
	Primd, Mirifici ipsius canonis constructio , & Logarithmorum ad 
	naturales ipsorum numeros habitudines. Secundb, Appendix de alid, 
	edque praestantiore Logarithmorum specie construenaa. Tcrtid, Pro- 
	positiones quaedam eminentissimae, ad Triangula sphaerica mird 
	facilitate resolvenda. ... It would appear that this title-page was 
	to be substituted for the title-page of the Descriptio of 1614 by those 
	who bound the two books together. 

	1 The work of Justus Byrgius is described in the article Loga- 
	rithm. In that article it is mentioned that a Scotsman in 1594 in a 
	letter to Tycho Brahe held out some hope of logarithms; it is likely 
	that the person referred to is John Craig, son of Thomas Craig, who 
	has been mentioned as one of the colleagues of John Napier's father 
	as justice-depute. 

great simplification of which they were susceptible — a simplifica- 
tion to which nothing essential has since been added. 

When Napier published the Canonis Descriptio England had 
taken no part in the advance of science, and there is no British 
author of the time except Napier whose name can be placed in 
the same rank as those of Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, Kepler, 
Galileo, or Stevinus. In England, Robert Recorde had indeed 
published his mathematical treatises, but they were of trifling 
importance and without influence on the history of science. 
Scotland had produced nothing, and was perhaps the last country 
in Europe from which a great mathematical discovery would 
have been expected. Napier lived, too, not only in a wild country, 
which was in a lawless and unsettled state during most of his 
life, but also in a credulous and superstitious age. Like Kepler 
and all his contemporaries he believed in astrology, and he 
certainly also had some faith in the power of magic, for there is 
extant a deed written in his own handwriting containing a con- 
tract between himself and Robert Logan of Restalrig, a turbulent 
baron of desperate character, by which Napier undertakes " to 
serche and sik out, and be al craft and ingyne that he dow, to 
tempt, trye, and find out " some buried treasure supposed to be 
hidden in Logan's fortress at Fastcastle, in consideration of 
receiving one-third part of the treasure found by his aid. Of 
this singular contract, which is signed, " Robert Logane of 
Restalrige" and " Jhone Neper, Fear of Merchiston," and is 
dated July 1594, a facsimile is given in Mark Napier's Memoirs. 
As the deed was not destroyed, but is in existence now, it is to 
be presumed that the terms of it were not fulfilled; but the fact 
that such a contract should have been drawn up by Napier 
himself affords a singular illustration of the state of society and 
the kind of events in the midst of which logarithms had their 
birth. Considering the time in which he lived, Napier is singu- 
larly free from superstition: his Plaine Discovery relates to a 
method of interpretation which belongs to a later age; he shows 
no trace of the extravagances which occur everywhere in the 
works of Kepler; and none of his writings contain allusions to 
astrology or magic. 

After Napier's death his manuscripts and notes came into the 
possession of his second son by his second marriage, Robert, who 
edited the Construction and Colonel Milliken Napier, Robert's lineal 
male representative, was still in the possession of many of these 
private papers at the close of the 18th century. On one occasion 
when Colonel Napier was called from home on foreign service, these 
papers, together with a portrait of John JNapier and a Bible with his 
autograph, were deposited for safety in a room of the house at Milli- 
ken, in Renfrewshire. During the owner's absence the house was 
burned to the ground, and all the papers and relics were destroyed. 
The manuscriptshad not been arranged or examined, so that the 
extent of the loss is unknown. Fortunately, however, Robert Napier 
had transcribed his father's manuscript De Arte Logistica, and the 
copy escaped the fate of the originals in the manner explained in the 
following note, written in the volume containing them by Francis, 
seventh Lord Napier: "John Napier of Merchiston, inventor of 
the logarithms, left his manuscripts to his son Robert, who appears 
to have caused the following pages to have been written out fair 
from his father's notes, for Mr Brings, professor of geometry at 
Oxford. They were given to Francis, the fifth Lord Napier, by 
William Napier of Culcreugh, Esq., heir-male of the above-named 
Robert. Finding them in a neglected state, amongst my family 
papery, I have bound them together, in order to preserve them 
entire. — Napier, 7th March 1801." 

An account of the contents of these manuscripts was given by 
Mark Napier in the appendix to his Memoirs of John _ Napier, and 
the manuscripts themselves were edited in their entirety by him 
in 1839 under the title De Arte Logistica Joannis Naperi Mer- 
chistonii Baronis Libri qui supersunL Itnpressum Edinburgi 
m.dccc.xxx.ix., as one of the publications of the Bannatyne Club. 
The treatise occupies one hundred and sixty-two pages, and there 
is an introduction by Mark Napier of ninety-four pages. The 
Arithmetic consists of three books, entitled — (1) De Computationibus 
Quantitatum omnibus Logisticae speciebus communium; (2) De 
Logistica Arithmetica; (3) De Logistica Geometrica. At the end 
of this book occurs the note — " 1 could find no more of this geo- 
metricall pairt amongst all his fragments." The Algebra Joannis 
Naperi Merckistonii Baronis consists of two books: (1) " De nomi- 
nata Algebrae parte; (2) De positiva sive cossica Algcbrae parte," 
and concludes with the words, " There is no more of his algebra 
orderiie sett doun." The transcripts are entirely in the handwriting 
of Robert Napier himself, and the two notes that have been quoted 
prove that they were made from Napier's own papers. The title, 
which is written on the first leaf, and is also in Robert Napier's 
writing, runs thus : " The Baron of Merchiston his booke of Arith- 
meticke and Algebra. For Mr Henrie Briggs, Professor of Geometrie 
at Oxforde." 

These treatises were probably composed before Napier had 
invented the logarithms or any of the apparatuses described in the 
Rabdologia; for they contain no allusion to the principle of loga- 
rithms, even where we should expect to find such a reference, and 
the one solitary sentence where the Rabdologia is mentioned (" sive 
omnium facillime per ossa Rhabdologiae nostrae ") was probably 
added afterwards. It is worth while to notice that this reference 
occurs in a chapter " De Multiplications et Partitions compendiis 
miscellaneis," which, supposing the treatise to have been written in 
Napier's younger days, may have been his earliest production on a 
subject over which his subsequent labours were to exert so enormous 
an influence. 

Napier uses abundantes and defectivae for positive and negative, 
defining them as meaning greater or less than nothing (" Abun- 
dantes sunt quantitatcs majores nihilo: defectivae sunt quantitates 
minores nihilo "). The same definitions occur also in the Canonis 
Descriptio (1614), p. 5: " Logarithmos sinuum, qui semper majores 
nihilo sunt, abundantes vocamus, et hoc signo -f, aut nullo praeno- 
tamus. Logarithmos autem minores nihilo defectivos vocamus, 
praenotantes eis hoc si^num -." Napier may thus have been the 
first to use the expression " quantity less than nothing." He uses 
" radicatum " for power (for root, power, exponent, his words are 
radix, radicatum, index). 

Apart from the interest attaching to these manuscripts as the 
work of Napier, they possess an independent value as affording 
evidence of the exact state of his algebraical knowledge at the time 
when logarithms were invented. There is nothing to show whether 
the transcripts were sent to Briggs as intended and returned by him, 
or whether they were not sent to him. Among the Merchiston 
papers is a thin quarto volume in Robert Napier's writing contain- 
ing a digest of the principles of alchemy; it is addressed to his son, 
and on the first leaf there are directions that it is to remain in his 
charter-chest and be kept secret except from a few. This treatise 
and the transcripts seem to be the only manuscripts which have 
escaped destruction. 

The principle of " Napier's bones " may be easily explained by 
imagining ten rectangular slips of cardboard, each divided into 
nine squares. In the top squares of the 
slips the ten digits are written, and each 
slip contains in its nine squares the first 
nine multiples of the digit which appears 
in the top square. With the exception of 
the top squares, every square is divided 
into two^ parts by a diagonal, the units 
being written on one side and the tens on 
the other, so that when a multiple consists 
of two figures they are separated by the 
diagonal. Fig. 1 shows the slips corre- 
sponding to the numbers 2, o, 8, 5 placed 
side by side in contact with one another, 
and next to them is placed another slip 
containing, in squares without diagonals, 
the first nine digits. The slips thus placed 
in contact give the multiples of the number 
2085, the digits in each parallelogram being 
added together; for example, correspond- 
ing to the number 6 on the right-hand slip, 
we have o, 8+3, 0+4, 2, 1 ; whence we find 
o, 1, 5, 2, 1 as the digits, written backwards, 
of 6X2085. The use of the slips for the purpose of multiplication is 
now evident; thus to multiply 2085 by 736 we take out in this 
manner the multiples corresponding to 6, 3, 7, and set down the digits 
as they are obtained, from right to left, shifting them back one place 
and adding up the columns as in ordinary multiplication, viz. the 
figures as written down are — 

	12510 
	6255 
	14595 
	i53456o 

Napier's rods or bones consist of ten oblong pieces of wood or 
other material with square ends. Each of the four faces of each rod 
contains multiples of one of the nine digits, and is similar to one of 
the slips just described, the first rod containing the multiples of 
o, 1,9, 8, the second of o, 2, 9, 7, the third of o, 3, 9, 6, the fourth 
of o, 4, 9, 5, the fifth of 1, 2, 8, 7, the sixth of 1,3, 8, 6, the seventh 
of 1,4, 8, 5, the eighth of 2, 3, 7, 6, the ninth of 2, 4, 7, 5, and the 
tenth of 3, 4, 6, 5. Each rod therefore contains on two of its faces 
multiples of digits which are complementary tO a those on the other 
two faces; and the multiples of a digit and of its complement are 
reversed in position. The arrangement of the numbers on the rods 
will be evident from fig. 2, which represents the four faces of the 
fifth rod. The set of ten rods is thus equivalent to four sets of slips 
as described above, and by their means we may multiply every 
number less than 11,111, and also any number (consisting of course 

	Fig. 1. 

of not more than ten digits) which can be formed by the top digits 
of the bars when placed side by side. Of course two sets of rods 
may be used, and by their means we may multiply every number 
less than iii,iii,in and so on. It will be noticed that the rods 
only give the multiples of the number which is to be multiplied, or 
of the divisor, when they are used for division, and it is evident that 
they would be of little use to any one who 
knew the multiplication table as far as 9X9. 
In multiplications or divisions of any length it 
is generally convenient to begin by forming a. 
table of the first nine multiples of the multi- 
plicand or divisor, and Napier's bones at best 
merely provide such a table, and in an incom- 
plete form, for the additions of the two figures 
in the same parallelogram have to be performed 
each time the rods are used : The Rdbdologia 
attracted more general attention than the loga- 
rithms, and as has been mentioned, there were 
several editions on the Continent. Nothing shows 
more clearly the rude state of arithmetical know- 
ledge at the beginning of the 17th century than 
the universal satisfaction with which Napier's 
invention was welcomed by all classes and re- 
■ garded as a real aid to calculation. Napier also 
describes in the Rabdologia two other larger rods 
to facilitate the extraction of square and cube 
roots. In the Rabdologia the rods are called 
" virgulae," but in the passage quoted above 
from the manuscript on arithmetic they are referred to as 
" bones " (ossa). 

Besides the logarithms and the calculating rods or bones, Napier's 
name is attached to certain rules and formulae in spherical trigono- 
metry. " Napier's rules of circular parts," which include the com- 
plete system of formulae for the solution of right-angled triangles, 
may be enunciated as follows. Leaving the right angle out of 
consideration, the sides including the right angle, the complement of 
the hypotenuse, and the complements of the other angles are called 
the circular parts of the triangle. Thus there are five circular parts, 
a, by 90 ° — A, 90 ° — c, 90 — B, and these are supposed to be arranged 
in this order {i.e. the order in which they occur in the triangle) 
round a circle. Selecting any part and calling it the middle part, 
the two parts next it are called the adjacent parts and the remaining 
two parts the opposite parts. The rules then are^- 

	sine of the middle part = product of tangents of adjacent parts 
	= product of cosines of opposite parts. 

These rules were published in the Canonis Descriptio (1614), and 
Napier has there given a figure, and indicated a method, by means 
of which they may be proved directly. The rules are curious and 
interesting, but of very doubtful utility, as the formulae are best 
remembered by the practical calculator in their unconnected form. 

	'* Napier's analogies " are the four formulae — 
	Fig. 2. 
	tani(a+»- ^{^gj tanic, 
	^^-w-^ri!*"^ 

They were first published after his death in the Construct™ among 
the formulae in spherical trigonometry, which were the results of 
his latest work. Robert Napier says that these results would have 
been reduced to order and demonstrated consecutively but for 
his father's death. Only one of the four analogies is actually 
given by Napier, the other three being added by Briggs in the 
remarks which are appended to Napier's results. The work left 
by Napier is, however, rough and unfinished, and it is uncertain 
whether he knew of the other formulae or not. They are, however, 
so simply deducible from the results he has given that all the four 
analogies may be properly called by t his name. An analysis of the 
formulae contained in the Descriptio and Constructio is given by 
Delambre in vol. i. of his Histoire de V Astronomic moderne. 

To Napier seems to be due the first use of the decimal point in 
arithmetic. Decimal fractions were first introduced by Stevinus in 
his tract La Disnte, published in 1585, but he used cumbrous ex- 
ponents (numbers enclosed in circles) to distinguish the different 
denominations, primes, seconds, thirds, &c. Thus, for example, he 
would have written 123-456 as j 23(0)4(1)5(2)6(3). I fl the Rab- 
dologia Napier gives an " Admonitio pro Decimali Arithmetica," in 
which he commends the fractions of Stevinus and gives an example 
of their use, the division of 861094 by 432. The quotient is written 
} 993. 2 73 in the work, and 1 993, 2 '7*3 in the text. This single 
instance of the use of the decimal point in the midst of an arith- 
metical process, if it stood alone, would not suffice to establish a 
claim for its introduction, as the real introducer of the decimal 
point is the person who first saw that a point or line as separator 
was all that was required to distinguish between the integers and 
fractions, and used it as a permanent notation and not merely in the 
course of performing an arithmetical operation. The decimal point 
is t> however, used systematically in the Constructio (1619), there 
being perhaps two hundred decimal points altogether in the book. 
The c^/cnal point is defined on p. 6 of the Constructio in the 
words: *if uJyms periodo sic in se distinctis, quicquid post 
periodum notatur f radio est, cujus denominator est unitas cum tot 
cyphris post se, quot sunt figurae post periodum. Ut 10000000-04 
valet idem, quod iooooooo T fo. Item 25-803, idem quod 25tVVV 
Item 9909998-0005021, idem valet quod 0999998 ^MHot. & sic de 
caetens. ' On p. C 10-502 is multiplied by 3*216, and the result 
found to be 33-774432 ; and on pp. 23 and 24 occur decimals not 
attached to integers, viz. -4999712 and -0004950. These examples 
show that Napier was in possession of all the conventions and attri- 
butes that enable the decimal point to complete so symmetrically 
our system of notation, viz. (1) he saw that a point or separatrix was 
quite enough to separate integers from decimals, and that no signs 
to indicate primes, seconds, &c, were required; (2) he used ciphers 
after the decimal point and preceding the first significant figure; 
an d (3) he had no objection to a decimal standing by itself without 
any integer. Napier thus had complete command over decimal 
fractions and the use of the decimal point. Briggs also used deci- 
mals, but in a form not quite so convenient as Napier. Thus he 
prints 63-0957379 as 63 0957379, viz. he prints a bar under the 
decimals; this notation first appears without any explanation in 
his " Lucubrationes " appended to the Constructio. Briggs seems 
to have used the notation all his life, but in writing it, as appears 
from manuscripts of his, he added also a small vertical line just 
high enough to fix distinctly which two figures it was intended to 
separate: thus he might have written 6 3 095 7379. The vertical line 
was printed by Oughtred and some of Briggs's successors. It was a 
long time before decimal arithmetic came into general use, and all 
through the 17th century exponential marks were in common use. 
There seems but little doubt that Napier was the first to make use of 
a decimal separator, and it is curious that the separator which he 
used, the point, should be that which has been ultimately adopted, 
and after a long period of partial disuse. 

The hereditary office of king's poulterer (Pultrie Regis) was for 
many generations in the family of Merchiston, and descended to 
John Napier. The office, Mark Napier states, is repeatedly men- 
tioned in the family charters as appertaining to the " pultre landis " 
near the village of Dene in the shire of Linlithgow. The duties 
were to be performed by the possessor or his deputy; and the king 
was entitled to demand the yearly homage of a present of poultry 
from the feudal holder. The pultrelands and the office were sold 
by John Napier in 1610 for 1700 marks. With the exception of the 
pultrelands all the estates he inherited descended to his posterity. 

With regard to the spelling of the name, Mark Napier states 
that among the family papers there exist a great many documents 
signed by John Napier. His usual signature was " Jhone Neper," 
but in a letter written in 1608, and in all deeds signed after that date, 
he wrote " Jhone Nepair." His letter to the king prefixed to the 
Plaine Discovery is signed " John Napeir." His own children, who 
sign deeds along with him, use every mode except Napier, the form 
now adopted by the family, and which is comparatively modern. 
In Latin he always wrote his name " Neperus." The form " Neper " 
is the oldest, as John, third Napier of Merchiston, so spelt it in the 
15th century. 

Napier frequently signed his name " Jhone Neper, Fear of Mer- 
chisto~ " He was " Fear of Merchiston " because, more majorum, 
he had been invested with the fee of his paternal barony during the 
lifetime of his father, who retained the liferent. He has been some- 
times erroneously called l( Peer of Merchiston," and in the 1645 
edition of the Plaine Discovery he is so styled (see Mark Napier's 
Memoirs, pp. 9 and 173, and Libri qui supersunt, p. xciv.). 

The bibliographv of Napier's work attached to W. R. Macdonald's 
translation of the Canonis Constructio (1889) is complete and valuable. 
Napier's three mathematical works are reprinted by N. L. W. A. 
Gravelaar in Verhandelingen der Kon. Akad. van Wet te Amsterdam, 
1. sectie, deel 6 (1899). (J. W. L. G.) 

NAPIER, SIR WILLIAM FRANCIS PATRICK (1 785-1860), 
British soldier and military historian, third son of Colonel 
George Napier (1751-1804), and brother of Sir Charles James 
Napier (see above), was born at Celbridge, near Dublin, on the 
17th of December 1785. He became an ensign in the Royal 
Irish Artillery in 1800, but at once exchanged into the 62nd, and 
was put on half-pay in 1802. He was afterwards made a cornet 
in the Blues by the influence of his uncle the duke of Richmond, 
and for the first time did actual military duty in this regiment, 
but he soon fell in with Sir John Moore's suggestion that he should 
exchange into the 52nd, which was about to be trained in the 
famous camp of Shorncliffe. Through Sir John Moore he soon 
obtained a company in the 43rd, joined that regiment at Shorn- 
cliffe and became a great favourite with Moore. He served in 
Denmark, and was present at the engagement of Kioge, and, 
his regiment being shortly afterwards sent to Spain, he bore 
himself nobly through the retreat to Corunna, the hardships of 
which permanently impaired his health. In 1809 he became 
aide-de-camp to the duke of Richmond, lord, lieMofcant of 
Ireland, but joined the 43rd when that regiment was ordered 
again to Spain. With the light brigade (the 43rd, 52nd, and 95th), 
under the command of General Craufurd, he marched to Talavera 
in the famous forced march which he has described in his History, 
and had a violent attack of pleurisy on the way. He, however, 
refused to leave Spain, was wounded on the Coa, and shot near 
the spine at Cazal Nova. His conduct was so conspicuous during 
the pursuit of Massena after he left the lines of Torres Vedras 
that he as well as his brother George was recommended for a 
brevet majority. He became brigade major, was present at 
Fuentes d'Onor, but had so bad an attack of ague that he was 
obliged to return to England. In England he married Caroline 
Amelia Fox, daughter of General Henry Fox and niece of the 
statesman Fox. Three weeks after his marriage he again started 
for Spain, and was present at the storming of Badajoz, where 
his great friend Colonel M'Leod was killed. In the absence of the 
new lieutenant-colonel he took command of the 43rd regiment 
(he was now a substantive major) and commanded it at the 
battle of Salamanca. After a short stay at home he again 
joined his regiment at the Pyrenees, and did his greatest military 
service at the battle of the Nivelle, where, with instinctive 
military insight, he secured the most strongly fortified part of 
Soult's position, practically without orders. He served with his 
regiment at the battles of the Nive, where he received two wounds, 
Orthes, and Toulouse. For his services he was made brevet 
lieutenant-colonel, and one of the first C.B.'s. Like his brother 
Charles he then entered the military college at Farnham. He 
commanded his regiment in the invasion of France after Waterloo, 
and remained in France with the army of occupation until 1819, 
when he retired on half-pay. As it was impossible for him to 
live on a major's half-pay with a wife and family, he determined 
to become an artist, and took a house in Sloane Street, where he 
studied with George Jones, the academician. 

The years he had spent in France he had occupied in improving 
his general education, for, incredible as it seems, the author of the 
History of the War in the Peninsula could not spell or write 
respectable English till that time. But his career was to be great 
in literature, not in art. The tendency appeared in an able 
review of Jomini's works (Edinburgh Rev.) in 1821, and in 1823 
Mr Bickersteth (afterwards Lord Langdale) suggested to him 
the expediency of writing a history of the Peninsular War. For 
some time he did not take kindly to the suggestion, but at last 
determined to become an author in order to defend the memory 
of Sir John Moore, and to prevent the glory of his old chief being 
overshadowed by that of Wellington. The duke of Wellington 
himself gave him much assistance, and handed over to him the 
whole of Joseph Bonaparte's correspondence which had been 
taken at the battle of Vittoria; this was all in cipher, but Mrs 
Napier, witb great patience, discovered the keys. Marshal Soult 
also took an active interest in the work and arranged for the 
French translation of Mathieu Dumas. In 1828 the first volume 
of the History appeared. The publisher, John Murray, indeed, 
was disappointed in the sale of the first volume and Napier 
published the remainder himself. But it was at once seen that 
the great deeds of the Peninsular War were about to be fitly 
commemorated. The excitement which followed the appearance 
of each volume is proved by the innumerable pamphlets issued 
by those who believed themselves to be attacked, and by personal 
altercations with many distinguished officers. But the success 
of the book was proved still more by the absence of competition 
than by these bitter controversies. The histories of Sou they and 
Lord Londonderry fell still-born, and Sir George Murray, 
Wellington's quartermaster-general, who had determined to pro- 
duce the history, gave up the attempt in despair. This success was 
due to a combination of qualities which have justly secured for 
Napier the title of being the greatest military historian England 
has produced. When in 1840 the last volume of the History was 
published, his fame not only in England but in France and 
Germany was safely established. 

His life during these years had been chiefly absorbed in his 
History, but he had warmly sympathized with the movement 
for political reform which was agitating England. The Radicals 
of Bath and many other cities and towns pressed him to enter 
parliament, and Napier was actually invited to become the 
military chief of a national guard to obtain reforms by force of 
arms. He refused the dangerous honour on the ground that he 
was in bad health and had a family of eight children. In 1830 
he had been promoted colonel, and in 1842 he was made a major- 
general and given the lieutenant-governorship of Guernsey. 
Here he found plenty of occupation in controlling the relations 
between the soldiers and the inhabitants, and also in working 
out proposals for a complete scheme of reform in the government 
of the island. While he was at Guernsey his brother Charles 
had conquered Sind, and the attacks made on the policy of that 
conquest brought William Napier again into the field of literature. 
In 1845 he published his History of the Conquest ofScinde, and in 
1851 the corresponding History of the Administration ofScinde — 
books which in style and vigour rivalled the great History, but 
which, being written for controversial purposes, were not likely 
to maintain enduring popularity. In 1847 he resigned his 
governorship, and in 1848 was made a K.C.B., and settled at 
Scinde House, Clapham Park. In 1851 he was promoted lieu- 
tenant-general. His time was fully occupied in defending his 
brother, in revising the numerous editions of his History which 
were being called for, and in writing letters to The Times on every 
conceivable subject, whether military or literary. His energy 
is the more astonishing when it is remembered that he never 
recovered from the effects of the wound he had received at 
Cazal Nova, and that he often had to he on his back for months 
together. His domestic life was shadowed by the incurable 
affliction of his only son, and when his brother Charles died in 
1853 the world seemed to be darkening round him. He devoted 
himself to writing the life of that brother, which appeared in 
1857, and which is in many respects his most characteristic book. 
In the end of 1853 his younger brother, Captain Henry Napier, 
R.N., died, and in 1855 his brother Sir George (see below). 
Inspired by his work, he lived on till the year i860, when, broken 
by trouble, fatigue and ill-health, he died (February 12) at 
Clapham. Four months earlier he had been promoted to the 
full rank of general. 

Asa military historian Sir William Naoier is incomparably 
superior to any other English writer, and his true compeers are 
Thucydides, Caesar and Davila. All four had been soldiers in the 
wars they describe; all four possessed a peculiar insight into the 
mainsprings of action both in war and peace; and each possessed 
a peculiar and inimitable style. Napier always wrote as if he was 
burning with an inextinguishable desire to express what he was 
feeling, which gives his style a peculiar spontaneity, and yet he 
rewrote the first volume of his History no less than six times. His 
descriptions of sieges and of battles^ are admirable by themselves, 
and his analyses of the peculiarly intricate Spanish intrigues are 
even more remarkable, while the descriptions and analyses are 
both lit up with flashes of political wisdom and military insight. 
It is to be noted that he displays the spirit of the partisan, even 
when most impartial, and defends his opinions, even when most 
undoubtedly true, as if he were arguing some controverted question. 
If his style was modelled on anything, it was on Caesar's comment- 
aries, and a thorough knowledge o^ the writings of the Roman 
general will often explain allusions in Napier. The portraits of 
Sir John Moore and Colonel M'Leod, and the last paragraphs de- 
scriptive of the storming of Badajoz, may be taken as examples 
of his great natural eloquence. 

His brother, Sir George Thomas Napier (1784-1855), entered 
the army in 1800, and served with distinction under Moore and 
Wellington in the Peninsula — and lost his right arm at the 
storming of Badajoz. He became major-general in 1837, K.C.B. 
in 1838 and lieutenant-general in 1846. He was governor and 
commander-in-chief at the Cape from 1839 to 1843, during which 
time .the abolition of slavery and the expulsion of the Boers from 
Natal were the chief events. He was offered, but declined, the 
chief command in India after Chillianwalla, and also that of the 
Sardinian army in 1849. He became full general in 1854. He 
died at Geneva on the 16th of September 1855. His auto- 
biography, Passages in the Early Military Life of General Sir 
G. T. Napier, was published by his surviving son, General 
W. C. E. Napier (the author of an important work on outpost 
duty), in 1885. 

The youngest brother, Henry Edward Napier (1780-1853),' 
served in the navy during the Napoleonic wars, retired as a 
captain, and wrote a learned Florentine History from the earliest 
authentic Records to the Accession of Ferdinand III. of Tuscany 
(1846-1847). 

For Sir William Napier's life, see his Life and Letters, edited by the 
Right Honourable H. A. Bruce (Lord Aberdare) (2 vols., 1862). 


NAPIER AND ETTRICK, FRANCIS NAPIER, Baron (1819- 
1898), British diplomatist, was descended from the ancient 
Scottish family of Napier of Merchistoun, his ancestor Sir 
Alexander Napier (d. c. 1473) being the elder son of Alexander 
Napier (d. c. 1454), provost of Edinburgh, who obtained lands 
at Merchistoun early in the 15th century. Sir Alexander was 
comptroller of the household of the king of Scotland, and was 
often sent to England and elsewhere on public business. Of 
his descendants one Napier of Merchistoun was killed at Sauchie- 
burn, another fell at Flodden and a third at Pinkie. The seventh 
Napier of Merchistoun was Sir Archibald Napier (1534-1608), 
master of the Scottish mint, and the eighth was John Napier 
(q.v.) the inventor of logarithms. John's eldest son, Sir Archibald 
Napier (c. 1576-1645), was treasurer-depute of Scotland from 
1622 to 1 63 1, and was created Lord Napier of Merchistoun in 
1627. He married Margaret Graham, sister of the great marquess 
of Montrose, whose cause he espoused, and he wrote some 
Memoirs which were published in Edinburgh in 1793. His son 
Archibald, the 2nd lord (162 5-1658), fought under Montrose at 
Auldearn, at Alford, at Kilsyth and at Philiphaugh, and was 
afterwards with his famous uncle on the continent of Europe. 
His son, Archibald, the 3rd lord (d. 1683), was succeeded by 
special arrangement in the title, first by his nephew, Thomas 
Nicolson (1660-1686), a son of his sister Jean and her husband 
Sir Thomas Nicolson, Bart. (d. 1670), and then by his sister 
Margaret (d. 1706), the widow of John Brisbane (d. 1684). The 
6th lord was Margaret's grandson Francis Scott (c. 1702- 17 73), a 
son of Sir William Scott, Bart., of Thirlestane (d. 1725). Francis 
Scott, who took the additional name of Napier, had' a large 
family, his sons including William, the 7th lord, and Colonel 
George Napier (1 751-1804). His famous grandsons are dealt 
with above. Another literary member of the family was Mark 
Napier (1 798-1879), called by Mr Andrew Lang " the impetuous 
biographer of Montrose," who wrote Memoirs of John Napier 
of Merchiston (1834), Montrose and the Covenanters (1838), 
Memoirs of Montrose (1856), Memorials of Graham of Claverhouse 
(1 850-1 86 2), and a valuable legal work, The Law of Prescription 
in Scotland (1839 and again 1854). William, 7th Lord Napier 
(1730-1775), was succeeded as 8th lord by his son Francis (1758- 
1823), who, after serving in the English army during the American 
War of Independence, was lord high commissioner to the general 
assembly of the Church of Scotland, and compiled a genealogical 
account of his family which is still in manuscript. His son 
William John, the 9th lord (1786-1834), who was present at the 
battle of Trafalgar, was the father of Francis Napier, Lord Napier 
and Ettrick. 

Born on the 15th of September 18 19 Francis entered the 
diplomatic service in 1840, and was employed in successive posts 
at Vienna, Constantinople, Naples, Washington and the Hague. 
During this time he earned the highest opinions both at home 
and abroad. In i860 he became ambassador at St Petersburg, 
and in 1864 at Berlin. In 1866 he was appointed governor of 
Madras, and was at once confronted with a serious famine in the 
northern districts. In dealing with this and other problems he 
showed great activity and practical sense, and he encouraged 
public works, particularly irrigation. In 1872 he acted for a few 
months as Viceroy, after Lord Mayo's assassination; and on 
Lord Northbrook's appointment to the office he returned to 
England, being created a baron of the United Kingdom (Baron 
Ettrick of Ettrick) for his services. He continued, both in 
England and in Scotland, to take great interest in social questions. 
He was for a time a member of the London School Board, and 
he was chairman of the Crofters' Commission in 1883, the result 
of which was the appointment of a permanent body to deal with 
questions affecting the Scottish crofters and cottars. He died at 
Florence. on the 19th of December 1898, leaving a widow and 
three sons, the eldest of whom, William John George (b. 1846), 
succeeded to his titles. 


NAPIER OF MAGDALA, ROBERT CORNELIS NAPIER, 
1ST Baron (1810-1890), British field-marshal, son of Major 
Charles Frederick Napier, who was wounded at the storming of 
Meester Cornclis (Aug. 26, i8ro) in Java and died some months 
later, was born at Colombo, Ceylon, on the 6th of December 
1810. He entered the Bengal Engineers from Addiscombe 
College in 1826, and after the usual course of instruction at 
Chatham, arrived in India in November 1828, For some years 
he was employed in the irrigation branch of the public works 
department, and in 1838 he laid out the new lull station at 
Darjeeling. Promoted captain in January 1841, he was ap- 
pointed to Sirhind, where he laid out cantonments on a new 
principle — known as the Napier system — for the troops returning 
from Afghanistan. In December 1845 he joined the army of 
the Sutlej, and commanded the Engineers at the battle of Mudki, 
where he had a horse shot under him. At the battle of Ferozeshah 
on the 31st December he again had his horse shot under him, and, 
joining the 31st Regiment on foot, was severely wounded in 
storming the entrenched Sikh camp. He was present at the 
battle of Sobraon on 10th February 1846, and in the advance to 
Lahore; was mentioned in despatches for his services in the 
campaign, and received a brevet majority. He was chief engineer 
at the reduction of Kote-Kangra by Brigadier-General Wheeler 
in May 1846, and received the thanks of government. He was 
then appointed consulting engineer to the Punjab resident and 
council of regency, but was again called to the field to direct the 
siege of Multan. He was wounded in the attack on the entrenched 
position in September 1848, but was present at the action of 
Shujabad, the capture of the suburbs, the successful storm of 
Multan on 23rd January 1849, and the surrender of the fort of 
Chiniot. He then joined Lord Gough, took part, as commanding 
engineer of the right wing, in the battle of Gujrat in February 
1849, accompanied Sir W. R. Gilbert in his pursuit of the Sikhs 
and Afghans, and was present at the passage of the Jhelum, the 
surrender of the Sikh army, and the surprise of Attock. For his 
services he was mentioned in despatches and received a brevet 
lieutenant-colonelcy. At the close of the war Napier was 
appointed civil engineer to the board of administration of the 
annexed Punjab province, and carried out many important 
public works during his tenure of office. In December 1852 he 
commanded a column in the first Hazara expedition, and in the 
following year against the Boris; and for his services in these 
campaigns was mentioned in despatches, received the special 
thanks of government and a brevet-colonelcy. He was 
appointed military secretary and adjutant-general to Sir James 
Outranks force for the relief of Lucknow in the Indian Mutiny 
in 1857, and was engaged in the actions which culminated in the 
first relief of Lucknow. He directed the defence of Lucknow until 
the second relief, when he was severely wounded in crossing a 
very exposed space with Outram and Havelock to meet Sir Colin 
Campbell, He was chief of the staff to Outram in the defence of 
the Alambagh position, and drew up the plan of operations for 
the attack of Lucknow, which was approved by Sir Colin Camp- 
bell and carried out by Napier, as brigadier-general commanding 
the Engineers, in March 1858. On the fall of Lucknow Napier 
was most favourably mentioned in despatches, and made C,B. 
He joined Sir Hugh Rose as second-in-command in his march on 
Gwalior, and commanded the 2nd brigade at the action of Morar 
on the 1 6th June, On the fall of Gwalior he was entrusted with 
the task of pursuing the enemy. With only 700 men he came up 
with Tantia Tppi and 1 2,000 men on the plains of Jaora Alipur, and 
completely defeated him, capturing all his guns (25), ammunition 
and baggage. On Sir Hugh Rose's departure he took command of 
the Gwalior division, captured Paori in August, routed Ferozeshah, 
a prince of the house of Delhi, at Ranode in December, and, 
in January 1859, succeeded in securing the surrender of Man 
Singh and Tantia Topi, which ended the war. For his services 
Napier received the thanks of parliament and of the Indian 
government, and was made K.C.B. 

In January 1860 Napier was appointed to the command of 
the 2nd division of the expedition to China under Sir Hope Grant, 
and took part in the action of Sinho, the storm of the Peiho 
forts, and the entry to Peking. For his services he received the 
thanks of parliament, and was promoted major-general for 
distinguished service in the field. For the next four years Napier 
was military member of the council of the governor-general 
of India and, on the sudden death of Lord Elgin, for a short 
time acted as governor-general, until the arrival of Sir W. T. 
Denison from Madras. In January 1865 he was given the com- 
mand of the Bombay army, in March 1867 he was promoted 
lieutenant-general, and, later in that year, appointed to command 
the expedition to Abyssinia, selecting his own troops and making 
all the preparations for the campaign. He arrived at Annesley 
Bay in the Red Sea early in January 1868, reached Magdala, 
420 m. from the coast, in April; stormed the stronghold, freed 
the captives, razed the place to the ground, returned to the 
coast, and on the 18th June the last man of the expedition had 
left Africa. He received for his services the thanks of parlia- 
ment, a pension, a peerage, the G.C.B. and the G. C.S.I. The 
freedom of the cities of London and Edinburgh was conferred 
upon him, with presentation swords, and the universities 
bestowed upon him honorary degrees. In 1869 he was elected 
a fellow of the Royal Society. He held the command-in-chief 
in India for six years from 1870, during which he did much to 
benefit the army and to encourage good shooting. He was 
promoted general in 1874, and appointed a colonel-commandant 
of the Royal Engineers. In 1876 he was the guest of the German 
crown prince at the military manoeuvres, and from that year 
until 1883 held the government and command of Gibraltar. 
In the critical state of affairs in 1877 he was nominated com- 
mander-in-chief of the force which it was proposed to send to 
Constantinople. In 1879 he was a member of the royal com- 
mission on army organization, and in November of that year 
he represented Queen Victoria at Madrid as ambassador extra- 
ordinary on the occasion of the second marriage of the king of 
Spain. On the 1st of January 1883 he was promoted to be field- 
marshal, and in December 1886 appointed Constable of the 
Tower of London. He died in London on the 14th of January 
1890. His remains received a state funeral, and were buried 
in St Paul's Cathedral on the 21st of January. He was twice 
married, and left a large family by each wife, his eldest son, 
Robert William (b. 1845), succeeding to his barony. A statue 
of him on horseback by Boehm was erected at Calcutta when 
he left India, and a replica of it was afterwards set up to his 
memory in Waterloo Place, London. 


NAPIER, a seaport on the east coast of North Island, New 
Zealand, capital of the provincial district of Hawke's Bay, 
200 m. by rail N.E. of Wellington. Pop. (1906) 9454. The 
main portion of the town stretches along the fiat shoreland of 
Hawke's Bay, while the suburbs extend over the hills to the north. 
The site consists of a picturesque peninsula known as Scinde 
Island. The harbour (Port Ahuriri) is sheltered by a break- 
water. The cathedral church of St John (1888) for the bishopric 
of Waiapu, is one of the finest ecclesiastical buildings in New 
Zealand, imitating the Early English style in brick. An 
athenaeum, a small hospital, a lunatic asylum, a philosophical 
society and an acclimatization society are among the public 
institutions. The town (named after Sir Charles James Napier) 
is under municipal government, and returns a member to the 
New Zealand House of Representatives. The district is agri- 
cultural, and large quantities of wool and tinned and frozen 
meats are exported. There is railway communication with 
Wellington, New Plymouth, and the Wairarapa, Wanganui 
and Manawatu districts. Numerous old native pas or fortified 
villages are seen in the neighbourhood. 


NAPLES (Ital. Napoli, and Lat. Neapolis), formerly the capital 
of the kingdom of the Two Sicilies, and since i860 the chief town 
of the province which bears its name, the smallest province 
in the kingdom of Italy. It is the largest city in the country, 
containing 547,503 inhabitants in 1901. It is a prefecture; 
the see of a cardinal archbishop; the residence of the general 
commanding the tenth Army Corps and of the admiral com- 
manding the second Naval Department of Italy; and it 
possesses also an ancient and important university. 

Naples disputes with Constantinople the claim of occupying 
the most beautiful site in Europe. It is situated on the northern 
shore of the Bay of Naples (Sinus Cumanus), in 40 52' N., 
1 4° 15' 45" E., as taken from the lighthouse on the mole. By 
rail it is distant 151 m. from Rome, but the line is circuitous, 
and a direct electric line was contemplated in 1907, to run nearer 
the coast and shorten the distance from the capital by more than 
30 m. (For map, see Italy.) The circuit of the bay is about 
35 m. from the capo di Miseno on the north-west to the Punta 
della Campanella on the south-east, or more than 52 m. if the 
islands of Ischia, at the north-west, and of Capri, at the south 
entrance, be included. At its opening between these two islands 
it is 14 m. broad; while another 4 m. separates Capri from the 
mainland at the Punta della Campanella, and from the opening 
to its head at Portici the distance is 15 m. It affords good 
anchorage, with nearly 7 fathoms of water, and is well sheltered, 
except from winds which blow from points between south-east 
and south-west. In the latter winds Sorrento should be especially 
avoided, as no safe anchorage can be found there at less than 
15 fathoms, and the same remark applies to Capri with winds 
from S.W. to N,W. There is a perceptible tide of nearly 9 in. 

On the north-east shore east of Naples is an extensive flat, forming 
part of the ancient Campania Felix, and watered by the small stream 
Sebeto and by the Sarno, which last in classical times formed the 
port of Pompeii. From this flat, between the sea and the range of the 
Apennines, rises Mount Vesuvius, at the base of which, on or near the 
sea-shore, are the populous villages of San Giovanni Teduccio, 
Portici, Resina, Torre del Greco, Torre dell' Annunziata, &c, and the 
classic ^ sites of Herculaneum and Pompeii. At the south-east 
extremity of the plain, 3 m. beyond the outlet of the Sarno, a great 
offshoot of the Apennines, branching from the main range near Cava, 
and projecting as a peninsula more than 12 m. west, divides the 
pay of Naples from the bay of Salerno (Sinus Paestanus), and ends 
in the bold promontory of the Punta della Campanella (Promon- 
torium Minervae), which is separated by a strait 01 4 m. from Capri. 
On the north slope of this peninsula, where the plain ends and the 
coast abruptly bends to the west, stands the town of Castellammare, 
near the site of Stabiae, at the foot of Monte Sant* Angelo, which 
rises suddenly from the sea to a height of 4722 ft. Farther west, 
and nearly opposite to Naples across the bay, are Vico, Meta, 
Sorrento, Massa and many villages. 

The north-west shore to the west of Naples is more broken 
and irregular. The promontory of Posilipo, which projects d ue south , 
divides this part of the bay into two smaller bays — the eastern, with 
the city of Naples, and the western, or Bay of Baiae, which is sheltered 
from all winds. A tunnel through the promontory, 2244 ft. long, 
21 ft. broad, and in some places as much as 70 ft. high, possibly 
constructed by Marcus Agrippa in 27 B.C., forms the so-called grotto 
of Posilipo; at the Naples end stands the reputed tomb of Virgil. 
Beyond Posilipo is the small island of Nisida (Nests) ; and at a short 
distance inland are the extinct craters of Solfatara and Astroni and 
the lake of Agnano. Farther west, onthe coast, and provided with a 
convenient harbour, stands Pozzuoli (Puteoli), a city containing 
many Roman remains, but now chiefly remarkable for the large gun- 
works erected by Messrs Armstrong & Co. ; and beyond it, round the 
Bay of Baiae, are Monte Nuovo, a hill thrown up in a single night 
in September 1538; the classic site of Baiae; the Lucrine Lake; 
Lake Avernus; the Lake of Fusaro (Acherusia Palus); the Elysian 
Fields; and the port a nd^ promontory ofMiscnum. Still farther to 
the south-west lie the islands of Procida -(Prochyta) and Ischia 
(Pilkecusa, Aenaria or Inarime), which divide the Bay of Naples 
from the extensive Bay of Gaeta. All this country was comprised 
in classical times underthe title of < the Phlegrean Fields, and was 
certainly then more actively volcanic thanit now is, although the 
severe shock of earthquake which occurred in the island of Ischia in 
1883 completely destroyed Casamicciola, and did serious damage 
to Forio, Lacco Ameno and Serrara Fontana, shows that there is 
great seismic activity in the locality. The whole region abounds 
wkh^ fissures from which steam highly charged with hydrochloric 
acid is continually issuing, and in many places boiling water is found 
at a very few feet below the surface. 

The city of Naples is built at the base and on the slopes of a 
range of volcanic hills, and, rising from the shore like an amphi- 
theatre, is seen to best advantage from the sea. From the summit 
occupied by the castle of St Elmo a transverse ridge runs south 
to form the promontory of Pizzofalcone, and divides the city into 
two natural crescents. The western crescent, known as the 
Chiaja ward, though merely a long narrow strip between the sea 
and Vomero hill, is the fashionable quarter most frequented 
by foreign residents and visitors. A fine broad street, the Riviera 
di Chiaja, begun in the close of the 16th century by Count 
d'Olivares, and completed by the duke de Medina Ceh" (1695- 

1700), runs for a mile and a half from east to west, ending in 
the quarter of Mergellina and Piedigrotta at the foot of the hill 
of Posilipo. In front lie the Villa Communale (first called Reale 
and subsequently Nazionale) public gardens, the chief promenade 
of the city, which were first laid out in 1780, and have been 
successively extended in 1807, in 1834, and again in recent years; 
and the whole edge of the bay from the Castel dell' Ovo to 
Mergellina is lined by a massive embankment and carriage- 
way, the Via Caracciolo, constructed in 1875-1881. The eastern 

crescent includes by far the largest as well as the oldest portion 
of Naples — the ports, the arsenal, the principal churches, &c. 
The best-known thoroughfare is the historic Toledo (as it is 
still popularly called, though the official name is Via Roma) 
which runs almost due north from the Piazza (Largo) del 
Plebiscito in front of the Palazzo Reale, till, as Strada Nuova 
Di Capodimonte, crossing the Ponte della Sanita (constructed 
by Murat across the valley between Santa Teresa and Capodi- 
monte), it reaches the gates of the Capodimonte palace. A 
drive, the Corso Vittorio Emmanuole, winds along the slopes 
behind tbe city from the Str. di Piedigrotta (at the west end of 
the Riv. di Chiaja) till it reaches the museum by the Via Salvator 
Rosa. The character of the shore of the eastern crescent has been 
much altered by the new harbour works, which with the wharves 
and warehouses have absorbed the Villa del Popolo, or People's 
Park, originally constructed on land reclaimed from the bay. 

The streets of Naples are generally well-paved with large 
blocks of lava or volcanic basalt. In the older districts there is 
a countless variety of narrow gloomy streets, many of them 
steep. The houses are mostly five or six storeys high, are 
covered with stucco made of a kind of pozzolana which hardens 
by exposure, and have large balconies and flat roofs. The castle 
of S. Elmo (S. Ermo, S. Erasmus), which dominates the whole 
city, had its origin in a fort (Belforte) erected by King Robert 
the Wise in 1543. The present building, with its rock-hewn 
fosses and massive ramparts, was constructed by Don Pedro de 
Toledo at the command of Charles V. in 1535, and was long 
considered practically impregnable. Damaged by lightning in 
1857, it was afterwards restored, and is now a military prison. 
On a small island (I. del Salvatore, the Megaris of Pliny), now 
joined to the shore at the foot of the Pizzofalcone by an arch- 
supported causeway, stands the Castel dell* Ovo (so called from 
its shape, though medieval legend associates the name with the 
enchanted egg on which the magician Virgil made the safety of 
the city to depend), which dates from 11 54. The walls of its 
chapel were frescoed by Giotto; but the whole building was 
ruined by Ferdinand II. in 1495, and had to be restored in the 
1 6th century. Castel Nuovo, a very picturesque building con- 
structed near the harbour in 1283 by Charles I. of Anjou, contains 
between the round towers of its facade the triumphal arch 
erected in 1470 to Alphonso I. and renovated in 1905. It 
numbers among its chambers the Gothic hall of Giovanni Pisano 
in which Celestine V. abdicated the papal dignity. Castel del 
Carmine, founded by Ferdinand I. in 1484, was occupied by the 
populace in Masaniello's insurrection, was used as a prison for 
the patriots of 1796, became municipal property in 1878, and is 
now a prison. The royal palace, begun in 1600 by the Count de 
Lemos, from designs by Domenico Fontana, partly burned in 
1837, and since repaired and enlarged by Ferdinand II., is an 
enormous building with a sea frontage of 800 ft. and a main 
facade 554 ft. long and 95 ft. high, exhibiting the Doric, Ionic 
and Composite orders in its three storeys. The statues on the 
facade of the palace were erected by King Humbert I. in 1885, 
and represent the titular heads of the various dynasties which 
have reigned at Naples, beginning with Ruggiero the Norman 
(1130); followed by Frederick II. of.Suabia (1197); Charles I. 
of Anjou (1266); Alfonso of Aragon (1442); Charles V. of Spain 
(1527); Charles III. (Bourbon) of Naples (1744); Gioacchino 
Murat (1808); and Victor Emmanuel II. (1861). 

Naples is the see of a Roman Catholic archbishop, always a 
cardinal. The cathedral has a chapter of thirty canons, and of 
the numerous religious houses formerly existing very few have 
in whole or in part survived the suppression in 1868. The city is 
divided into fifty parishes purely for ecclesiastical purposes, and 
there are 237 Roman Catholic churches and 57 chapels. 

Most of the churches are remarkable rather for richness in internal 
decoration than for architectural beauty. The cathedra! of St 
Januarius, occupying the site of temples of Apollo and Neptune, 
and still containing some of their original granite columns, was 
designed by Nicola Pisano, and erected between 1272 and 1316. 
Owing to frequent restorations occasioned by earthquakes, it now 
presents an incongruous mixture of different styles. The general 
pjan is that of a basilica with a nave and two (Gothic vaulted) 
aisles separated by pilasters. The western facade is of marble and 
was completed in 1006. Beneath the high altar is a subterranean 
chapel containing the tomb of^ St Januarius (San Gennaro), the 
patron saint of the city; in the right aisle there is a chapel (Cappella 
del Tesoro) built between 1608 and 1637 in popular recognition of 
his having saved Naples in 1527 " from famine, war, plague and the 
fire of Vesuvius " ; and in a silver tabernacle behind the high altar 
of this chapel^ are preserved the two phials partially filled with his- 
blood, the periodical liquefaction of which forms a prominent feature 
in the religious life of the city. Accessible by a door in the left 
aisle of the cathedral is the church of Sta Restituta, a basilica of 
the 7th century, and the original cathedral. Santa Chiara (14th 
century) is interesting for a fresco ascribed to Giotto (at one time 
there were many more), and monuments to Robert the Wise, his- 
queen Mary of Valois and his daughter Mary, empress of Constanti- 
nople. San Domenico Maggiore, founded by Charles II. in 1285, 
but completely restored after 1445, has an effective interior particu- 
larly rich in Renaissance sculpture. In the neighbouring monastery 
is shown the cell of Thomas Aquinas. San Filippo Neri or dei 
Gerolomini, erected in the close of the 16th century, has a white 
marble facade and two campaniles, and contains the tombstone of 
Giambattista Vico. Sta Maria del Parto, in the Chiaja, occupies- 
the site of the house of Sannazaro, and is named after his poem De 
Partu Virginis, San Francesco di Paolo, opposite the royal palace, 
is an imitation of the Pantheon at Rome by Pietro Bianchi di Lugano 
(1815-1837), and its dome is one of the boldest in Europe. The 
church of the Certosa (Carthusian monastery) of San Martino, on 
the hill below St Elmo's castle, has now become in name, as so 
many of the churches are in reality, a museum. Dating from the 
14th century, and restored by Fonsega in the 17th, it is a building 
of extraordinary richness of decoration, with paintings and sculpture 
by Guido Rem, Lanfranco, Caravaggio, D'Arpino, Solimene, Luca 
Giordano and notably a " Descent from the Cross " by Ribera, con- 
considered the finest work of this master. The monastery has been 
transformed into a medieval museum, where many specimens- 
illustrating the modern history of Naples may be studied, and some 
fine specimens of # majolica from the southern provinces can be 
inspected. The view from the south-western balcony is incompar- 
able. The marble cloister by Fonsega, though rather flamboyant in 
character, is one of the finest of its kind in existence. Other churches 
with interesting monuments are Sant' Anna dei Lombardi, built 
in 141 1 by Guerrello Origlia, which contains some splendid marble 
sculpture, especially Rosellino's " Nativity "in the Cappella Picco- 
lomini; Sant Angelo a Nilo, which contains the tomb of Cardinal 
Brancaccio, the joint work of Donatello and Michelozzo; San 
Giovanni a Carbonara, built in 1344 and enlarged by King Ladislaus- 
in 1400, which contains among much other remarkable sculpture the 
tomb of the king, the masterpiece of Andrea Ciccione (1414), and 
that of Sergiami Caracciolo, the favourite of Joanna II., who was- 
murdered in 1432 (the chapel in which it stands is paved with one 
of the earliest majolica pavements in Italy); San Lorenzo (1324), 
the Royal Church of the House of Anjou; and, for purely archaeo- 
logical^ interest, the Church of Sant' Aspreno, thought to be the oldest 
Christian church in Italy, in the crypt of the new Borsa or exchange. 
Persons interested in frescoes will admire those in the former monas- 
tery at the back of the church of S. Maria Donna Regina and those in 
the cloister of S. Severino and Sossio. A more ancient Christian 
monument than any of the convents or churches is the catacombs, 
which extend a great distance underground and are in many respects 
finer than those at Rome. The entrance is at the Ospizio dei Poveri 
di San Gennaro (see Schulze's monograph, Jena, 1877). 

Of the secular institutions in Naples none is more remarkable 
than the National Museum, formerly known as the Museo 
Borbonico. The building, begun in 1586 for vice-regal stables, 
and remodelled in 161 5 for the university, was put to its present 
use in 1790, when Ferdinand IV. proclaimed it his private 
property independently of the crown, placed in it the Farnese 
collection which he had inherited from his father, and all the 
specimens from Herculaneum, Pompeii, Stabiae, Puteoli, 
Paestum, &c, which till then had been housed in the palace at 
Portici, and gave it the name of Real Museo Borbonico. In 1860 
Garibaldi, when dictator at Naples, proclaimed the museum 
and the territory devoted to excavation to be the property of 
the nation, since which time it has been called the National 
Museum. Vast numbers of specimens have since been added to 
it both by purchase and from excavations, and it is now unique 
as a treasure house of Italo-Greek and Roman antiquities, 
besides containing a fine library and an important collection of 
pictures. 

A large additional space for exhibits was made in 1904, when the 
western half of the second floor was added, and the building as now 
arranged contains the large bronzes and statues on the ground 
floor; a gallery of Pompeian frescoes in the entresol; the library, 
picture gallery and small bronzes on the first floor; and the glass, 
jewelry, arms, papyri, gems, and the unique collection of Italo- 
Greek vases, on the second floor. The large bronzes are almost the 
only ones which have survived from classical times, the most famous 
of them being the seated Mercury and the dancing Faun; 
the marbles reckon among their vast number the Psyche, the 
Capuan Venus, the portraits of Homer and Julius Caesar, as well 
as the huge group called the Toro Farnese (Amphion and Zethus 
tying Dirce to its horns), the Farnese Hercules, the excellent 
though late statues of the Balbi on horseback and a very fine 
collection of ancient portrait busts. 

Modem Buildings. — The Galleria Umberto I. is a large cruci- 
form arcade opened in 1890. It somewhat resembles the Milan 
arcade, and has an octagon in the centre, with a cupola. It is 
highly ornamented with gilt and stucco. A music-hall occupies 
the basement. The Galleria Principe di Napoli is in a smaller 
arcade opposite to the National Museum, mainly occupied by 
shops where reproductions from the museum are sold. The 
Galleria Vittoria, opened in 1907, is a circular building with 
handsome dome, situated near the main entrance of the Villa 
Communale. It is in great part occupied by offices and shops. 
The Anglican church in Vico San Pasquale was built in 1862 on 
ground given to the British community by Garibaldi when 
dictator, and was the first Protestant church erected in Naples. 
Since the granting of religious liberty evangelical churches have 
been built by the Presbyterians, Wesleyans, French, Germans and 
Italians. A Greek church and a Jewish synagogue have also 
been opened. The Borsa (or exchange) is a fine building in the 
Piazza of the same name, built over the remains of the very 
ancient church of Sant* Aspreno, which are still preserved in the 
crypt. In front of it is the fine 16th-century Fontana Medina. 

Educational and Learned Institutions. — The university of Naples 
is one of the oldest in Italy, having been founded by Frederick II. 
in the first half of the 13th century. It had fallen to insignificance 
under the Bourbons, but since i860 it has rapidly recovered. It 
comprises five faculties (literature and philosophy, jurisprudence, 
mathematics, natural science and medicine), and is well equipped 
with zoological, mineralogical and geological museums, a physio- 
logical institute, a cabinet of anthropology, and botanical gardens* 
Originally erected in 1557 for the use of the Jesuits, the university 
buildings are regarded as the best work of Marco di Pino; the 
quadrangle, surrounded by a simple but effective peristyle, contains 
statues of Pietro della Vigna (Frederick's chancellor), Thomas 
Aquinas and Giordano Bruno. The new building, the shell of which 
was completed in 1906, faces the Rettifilo, a new wide street which 
leads from the Borsa in a straight line to the railway station; at 
the back it joins the former building, which is at a higher level. 
On the other or north side of the ancient building, and at the back of 
the Strada Constant inopoli, very large annexes have been formed 
for the medical school. The famous zoological station at Naples, 
whose aquarium is the principal building in the Villa Communale, 
is not connected with the university. Itwas founded by Dr Dohrn 
in 1872; a. large annexe was added to it a few years later on its 
western side, and a larger annexe on the eastern side was completed 
in 1907. The aquarium was originally established at Naples because 
the flora and fauna of the neighbourhood are more varied than 
those of any district in Europe. Its Mittheilungen began to be pub- 
lished in 1878, and portions of a great work on the flora and fauna 
of Naples come out year by year. It is justly considered the first 
as well as the oldest of the zoological stations of the world, and the 
chief universities pay £100 b. year for tables to which they send 
-students. At these tables every necessary is provided, each student 
having his own tanks with salt water laid on for keeping his speci- 
mens, and all necessary chemicals being provided. Of other scientific 
institutions we may mention the observatory on Vesuvius, which is 
'supported entirely by funds from the government, but is annexed 
informally to the university. Its object is to record earth-movements 
and volcanic phenomena. The Specola or astronomical observatory 
is also a government institution, and forms no official part of the 
university. It is situated on the hill of Capodimonte. 

The Royal Society of Naples, dating from 1756, was reconstituted 
in 1861, and is divided into three academies, namely: moral and 
political; physical and mathematical ; letters, archaeology and 
fine arts. The famous Accademia Pontaniana, founded by Antonio 
Becardella (surnamed Panormita owing to his origin from Palermo) 
and J. J. Pontanus in 1442, was restored in 1808 and still exists. 
The Royal School for Oriental Languages owes its existence to 
Matteo Ripa,who in 1732 established a school for Chinese mission- 
aries. The Royal Conservatory of Music in S. Pietro a Majella has 
existed in one form or other since 1760, and has had many famous 
pupils. 

Elementary education has proceeded with great rapidity, and 
there are ninety public elementary shools in the city, twenty-three 
ecclesiastical gratuitous schools and many evangelical schools at a 
very small payment. The higher grade schools are also numerous, 
and there are special foreign schools established by private enterprise 
for the education of the children of foreign residents. There are three 
schools for the blind and two for deaf-mutes. 

Libraries — The state archives in Vico San Severo e Sossio contain 
all the records of past governments; the Notarial archives in Via 
San Paolo contain all the original notarial acts from 1450 onwards, 
to the number of 800,000. The Royal national library in the building 
of the national museum contains 364,000 volumes and 7835 manu- 
scripts, many of which are of great value. The musical archives are 
kept here as a separate department. The Royal library of San 
Giacomo (100,000 vols.) hacl its origin in the Palace library of the 
Bourbon times. There may also be mentioned the Royal University 
library, the Royal Brancacciana library in Via Donnaromita, with 
125,000 vols, and 2000 important MSS., the Gerolomini library, 
mainly of ecclesiastical books and codices, and the Provincial library 
in Via Duomo, consisting mainly of technical books. The Biblioteca 
Communale, and the rich collection of seismic and vulcanological 
books made bythe Italian Alpine Club, are both in charge of the 
Societa di Storia Patria. This literary society was established in 
l %75* by a committee of private gentlemen anxious to record all 
possible details of the history of the locality. It has a good though 
not perfect collection of the early Neapolitan newspapers, a complete 
file of the principal modern ones and many interesting MSS. The 
society is governed by a council of literary men, and issues publi- 
cations from time to time. The Zoological Station or Aquarium 
has a very fine biological library. 

Theatres. — The San Carlo opera-house, with its area of 5157 sq. 
yds. and its pit capable of seating 1000 spectators, is one of the 
largest in Europe. It was originally built in 1737 under Charles III., 
but was destroyed by fire in 1816 and completely rebuilt. It was 
heavily subsidized in the Bourbon times, but now, except for giving 
the house, which is the property of the municipality, no assistance 
is granted from the public funds. The Mercadante is also a municipal 
theatre, but has no subsidy. The Bellini is a fine opera-house near 
the t museum, and the other chief theatres are the Sannazzaro, 
Politeama and Fiorentini. Numerous music halls have sprung up 
of late years, of which the principal is the Salone Marghenta in the 
basement of the Galleria Umberto Primo. 

Charities. — Charitable institutions are numerous in Naples. The 
Reclusorio or poorhouse was founded in the 18th century, and besides 
being a refuge for the indigent poor has a series of industrial schools 
attached, at which foundling boys are educated and taught trades. 
The principal hospitals are the Incurabili, Gesu e Maria, Santa Maria 
della Pace and a hospital for poor priests, which are all under the 
same management. The Pellegrini is exclusively surgical; the Santa 
Maria di Loreto is especially for the inmates of the Reclusorio and 
for street accidents; the Ospedale Lina for children; and the 
Ospedale Cotugno for infectious diseases. There is also an Inter- 
national hospital for the treatment of others than Italians, which 
was built by Lady Harriet Bentinck and is managed by an inter- 
national committee; a German hospital; and a hospital erected 
by the representatives of Baron Adolphe de Rothschild. There are 
two public lunatic asylums in the city, and another at the neighbour- 
ing town of Aversa; and many private asylums, among which 
Fleurent, Miano and Ponti Rossi may be mentioned. 

Harbour.-^ht a very early date the original harbour at Naples, 
now known in its greatly reduced state as Porto Piccolo, and fit only 
for boats and lighters, became too small. In 1302 Charles II. of 
Anjou began the construction of the Porto Grande by forming the 
Molo Grande or San Gennaro, which stretched eastward into the 
bay, and was terminated by a lighthouse in the 15th century. By 
the addition of a new pier running north-east from the lighthouse, 
and protected by a heavily armed battery, Charles III. in 1740 
a'dded greatly to the safety of the harbour. In 1826 the open area 
to the south of the Porto Grande was formed'into the Porto Militare 
by the construction of the Molo San Vincenzo, 1200 ft. long. Shortly 
after the formation of the new kingdom of Italy attention was called 
to the insufficiency of the harbour for modern wants ; and new works 
were begun in 1862. Besides the lengthening of the Molo San 
Vincenzo to a total of more than 5000 ft., the scheme as now carried 
out has completely revolutionized the harbour. A cross piece at the 
end of the Molo San Vincenzo has made the head of that structure 
into the form of the Greek letter gamma, thus affording considerable 
protection to the anchorage. New quays have been made all the 
way from the old Immacolatella landing-place to the new and 
spacious Capitaneria di Porto, on the eastern side of which is a new 
harbour used mainly for the coal trade, and piers such that the largest 
liner can lie alongside the jetty. The outer mole of this harbour runs 
out from the Castel del Carmine towards the south for some 1500 ft. 
and forms the inner side of the new steam basin, which when nearly 
completed in 1906 fell in on the farther side, and had to be re- 
constructed. The depth of this new harbour is from 25 to 30 ft. 
There are two projecting moles, one to the inner harbour and the 
second to the steam basin. In 1905 the total tonnage entering the 
port amounted to 4,698,872 tons, of which the Italians (including 
their coasting trade) carried 1,410,192 tons in 3687 vessels; the 
Germans 1,391,585 tons in 356 vessels; the British 1,136,345 tons 
in 402 vessels; and the French 245,206 tons in 161 vessels. Naples 
is the principal port for emigration, chiefly to North and South 
America; 281 emigrant ships sailed in 1905, carrying 216,103 emi- 
grants. The total imports for that year reached the sum of £5,397,918, 
and the exports £3,367,805^ The articles dealt in are wine, oil, 
spirits, drugs, tobacco, chemicals, hemp, cotton, wool, silk, timber, 
paper, leather and hides, metal, glass, cereals and live animals. 
The largest export was to the United States (£864,562), the next to 
Great Britain (£701,387), while the largest imports were from Great 
Britain (£1,233,410) and the United States (£807,564). The speciali- 
ties of Naples are the manufacture of coral, tortoise-shell, kid gloves 
and macaroni, but it has been growing also as an industrial centre. 
The port of Naples is second in the kingdom, and owns no rival save 
Genoa. 

Water Supply. — Since 1884 Naples has had as fine a water supply 
as any city in Europe. It is derived from the hills in the neighbour- 
hood of Avellino, and is thought to be the effluent of an underground 
lake. It rushes out from the hillside and is received in a covered 
masonry canal, whence it flows in large iron pipes till it reaches five 
enormous reservoirs constructed just opposite to the entrance gates 
of the royal palace at Capodimonte. Hence it comes by natural 
gravitation into the town at a pressure of five atmospheres, so that it 
supplies the highest parts of the town with abundant water. The 
water is so cold that in the hottest summer perishable articles can be 
preserved by merely securing them in a closed vessel and allowing 

Jthe water to drip upon it. The supply was" brought into the town 
just after the terrible cholera outbreak of 1884, and as each new 
standpipe was erected in the streets every well within 200 yds. of 
it was closed, so that in a short time no well remained in the town ; 
and thus a fertile source of infection was eliminated. Every house 
in the town and suburbs is now supplied with a constant supply of 
pure water. The effect on the health of the city has been extra- 
ordinary. Cholera epidemics, which used to be frequent, have 
become things of the past, and there is now abundant water for public 
fountains, washing the streets and watering gardens both public 
and private. The old sewers were found quite inadequate to carry 
off the large increase of water, and besides they all led directly into 
the bay, causing a terrible odour and rendering the water near the 
town unwholesome for bathing. t This has been remedied by a 
system of sewers, which after passing by a tunnel through the hill of 
Posilipo cross the plain beyond and discharge their contents into the 
open sea on the deserted coast of Cumae, 17 m. f romthe city of Naples. 
The old aqueduct, which was constructed in the 17th century by 
Carnignano and Criminelli and taps the 1 sclera at Sant' Agata dei 
Goti, is still available to a certain extent, but its water was never 
very wholesome, and as it was not laid on to houses but only supplied 
fountains and house cisterns which have since been filled up, no 
account need be taken of it. The solitary Leone fountain, a spring 
which supplied drinking water to the west end of the town, has been 
dry for many years. 

Modern Growth. — Naples, the most densely peopled city in 
Europe, has increased in modern times at an enormous rate. 
On the large areas reclaimed from the sea, vast hotels and 
mansions let in flats have been erected. The gardens at the west 
end of the town are all built over. The Vomero, once merely a 
scattered village, is now an important suburb, and a large 
workmen's quarter has sprung up beyond the railway station to 
house the populace which was turned out from the centre of the 
town when the works of the risanamento were undertaken. The 
increase in population between the census of 1881, when it was 
461,962, and the census in 1901 was 85,521. The commune, 
which includes not only the urban districts (sezioni) of San 
Ferdinando, Chiaja, S. Giuseppe, Monte Calvario, Awocata, 
Stella, San Carlo all' Arena, Vicaria, San Lorenzo, Mercato, 
Pendino and Porto, but also the suburban districts of Vomero, 
Posilipo, Fuorigrotta, Miano and Piscinola, has been built over 
in every direction, one great incentive being the creation of an 
industrial zone to the eastward of the city. This zone has been 
set aside for the purpose of industrial development, and all persons 
or companies who set up industrial concerns on it have grants 
of land at a nominal price, are free of taxes for ten years and 
have electric force supplied to them at a very low figure. The 
law came into force in 1906, and was immediately followed by 
the erection of a large number of factories, for spinning silk, 
cotton, jute and wool, and the making of railway plant, auto- 
mobiles, the building of ships, and in fact almost every kind of 
industry. After the cholera epidemic of 1884, M. Depretis, then 
premier, visited Naples, and in the course of a public speech 
gave vent to the famous dictum " Bisogna sventrare Napoli " — 
" Naples must be disembowelled! " Plans were at once made to 
pull down all the worst slums, and as these lay between the 
centre of the town and the railway station, a wide street was 
constructed from the centre of the town to the eastward, and 
on each side of it wide strips of ground were cleared to afford 
building sites for shops and offices. The funds for this vast 
undertaking were found partly by the state, which voted 
£3,000,000, and as to the rest by the Risanamento Company, 
which had a capital of £1,200,000. Before beginning operations 
of demolition it was obviously necessary to provide homes for 
the poor people who would be turned out, and a large working- 
class quarter was erected to the north and beyond the railway 
station. This quarter has wide airy streets and lofty houses, 
and though perhaps the houses were let at prices which were 
beyond the purses of the lowest class, the result of their erection 
was to cause a number of the poorer houses in the old town to 
be vacated, thus giving an opportunity to the lowest class to 
be at any rate better housed than they were before. The quarter 
described above is known as the Paone Vasto. There are also 
new middle-class quarters at Santa Lucia, Vomero Nuovo and 
Sant' Efremo, and better houses in the Via Sirignano, on the 
Riviera di Chiaja, Via Elena and Via Caracciolo at Mergellina, 
Via Partenope near the Chiatamone, and an aristocratic quarter 
in the large extensions made in the Rione Amedeo. The narrow 
alleys of Porto, Pendino and Mercato have nearly all disappeared, 
and old Naples has been vanishing day by day. One notable 
result of the widening of the streets has been the spread of the 
electric tramways, which traverse the town in various directions 
and are admirably served by a Belgian company. The city is 
mainly lighted by electricity, which has also found its way into 
all the public edifices and most private houses. 

Folk-lore. — The attention of antiquarians to the charms against 
the Evil Eye used by the inhabitants of the Neapolitan provinces 
was first drawn in 1 888, when it was shown that they were all 
derived from the survival of ancient classical legends which had 
sprung from various sources in connexion with classical sites in the 
neighbourhood. These may be divided into three classes: first, 
the sprig of rue in silver, with sundry emblems attached to it, all 
of which refer to the worship of Diana, whose shrine at Capua was 
of considerable importance; secondly, the serpent charms, which 
formed part of the worship of Aesculapius, and were no doubt derived 
largely from the ancient eastern t ophiolatry ; and lastly charms 
derived from the legends of the Sirens. A special confirmation is 
given in this case, as the Siren is represented mounted on her sea- 
horse crossing the Styx upon the vase of Pluto and Proserpine in the 
collection of the Naples Museum. This vase dates about 250 B.C., 
and the Siren charms represent her in the same way, but usually 
mounted on two sea-horses. The sea-horse and the Siren alone are 
commonly found as charms ; the Siren being sometimes in her 
fishtail form and sometimes in the form of a harpy. 

History. — All ancient writers agree in representing Naples as 
a Greek settlement, though its foundation is obscurely and 
differently narrated. The earliest Greek settlement in the 
neighbourhood was at Pithecusa (Ischia), but the colonists, 
being driven out of the island by the frequent earthquakes, 
settled on the mainland at Cumae, where they found a natural 
acropolis of great strategic value. From Cumae they colonized 
Dikearchia (Pozzuoli) and probably subsequently Palaeopolis. 
The site of Palaeopolis has given rise to much discussion, but the 
researches by R. T. Gunther open completely new ground, and 
seem to be the correct solution of the problem. He places 
Palaeopolis at Gaiola Point and has discovered the remains of 
the harbour, the town hall and various other rudiments of the 
ancient city. This site, moreover, corresponds with Livy's 
testimony, and would account for his statement that the towns 
of Palaeopolis and Neapolis were near together and identical in 
language and government. This opinion about the site of Palae- 
opolis has been based on the very considerable alterations which 
are known to have taken place in the level of the land, and the 
extensive submerged foundations of buildings off the southern ex- 
tremity of Posilipo have been identified with those of the old city. 

Parthenope, as well as Dikearchia, was formed as a new colony 
from Cumae, and was so called from a legendary connexion of 
the locality with the siren of that name, whose tomb was still 
shown in the time of Strabo. Parthenope was situated where 
Naples now stands, upon the splendid natural acropolis formed 
by the hill of Pizzofalcone, and defended on the land side by a 
fosse which is now the Strada di Chiaja, and a massive wall, of 
which remains may still be traced at the back of the existing 
houses. To the colonists of Parthenope there came afterwards 
a considerable addition from Athens and Chalcis, and they 
built themselves a town which they called Neapolis y or the " new 
city," in contradistinction to the old settlement, which- in con- 
sequence was styled Palaeopolis or the " old city." The name 
of Parthenope became lost, and the city of Palaeopolis fell into 
gradual decadence. 

In 328 B.C. the Palaeopolitans having provoked the hostility 
of Rome by their incursions upon her Campanian allies, the 
consul Publihus Philo marched against them, and having taken 
his position between the old and the new city, laid regular siege 
to Palaeopolis. By the aid of a strong Samnite garrison which 
they received, the Palaeopolitans were long able to withstand the 
attacks of the consul; but at length the city was betrayed into 
the hands of the Romans by two of her citizens. Neapolis 
possibly surrendered to the consul without any resistance, as it 
was received on favourable terms, had its liberties secured by 
a treaty, and obtained the chief authority, which previously 
seems to have been enjoyed by the older city. From that time 
Palaeopolis totally disappeared from history, and Neapolis 
became an allied city (Joederata civitas) — a dependency of Rome, 
to whose alliance it remained constantly faithful, even in the 
most trying circumstances. In 280 B.C. Pyrrhus unsuccessfully 
attacked its walls; and in the Second Punic War Hannibal was 
deterred by their strength from attempting to make himself 
master of the town. During the civil wars of Marius and Sulla 
a body of partisans of the latter, having entered it by treachery 
(82 B.C.), made a general massacre of the inhabitants; but 
Neapolis soon recovered, as it was again a flourishing city in the 
time of Cicero. It became a municipium after the passing of the 
lex Julia; under the empire it is noticed as a colonia, but the 
time when it first obtained that rank is uncertain — possibly 
under Claudius. 

Though a municipal town, Neapolis long retained its Greek 
culture and institutions; and even at the time of Strabo it 
had gymnasia and quinquennial games, and was divided into 
phratriae after the Greek fashion. When the Romans became 
masters of the world, many of their upper classes, both before 
the close of the republic and under the empire, from a love of 
Greek manners and literature or from indolent and effeminate 
habits, resorted to Neapolis, either for the education and the 
cultivation of gymnastic exercises or for the enjoyment of music 
and of a soft and luxurious climate. Hence we find Neapolis 
variously styled — by Horace oliosa Neapolis, by Martial docta 
Parthenope, by Ovfd in otia natam Parthenopen. It was the 
favourite residence of many of the emperors; Nero made his 
first appearance on the stage in one of its theatres; Titus assumed 
the office of its archon; and Hadrian became its demarch. It 
was chiefly at Neapolis that Virgil composed his Georgics; and 
he was buried on the hill of Pausilypus, the modern Posilipo, in 
its neighbourhood. It was also the favourite residence of the 
poets Statius (a.d. 61) and Silius Italicus (a.d. 25), the former 
of whom was a Neapolitan by birth. 

After the fall of the Roman Empire, Neapolis suffered severely 
during the Gothic wars. Having espoused the Gothic cause in 
the year 536, it was taken, after a protracted siege, by Belisarius, 
who turned aside an aqueduct, marched by surprise into the city 
through its channel, and put many of the inhabitants to the 
sword. In 542 Totila besieged it and compelled it to surrender, 
but being soon after recovered by Narses, it remained long a 
dependency of the exarchate of Ravenna, under the immediate 
government of a duke, appointed by the East Roman emperors. 

When the Lombards invaded Italy and pushed their conquests 
in the southern provinces, the limits of the Neapolitan duchy 
were considerably narrowed. In the beginning of the 8th century, 
at the time of the iconoclastic controversy, the emperor Leo 
the Isaurian having forced compliance to his edict against the 
worshipping of images, the Neapolitans, encouraged by Pope 
Gregory III., threw off their allegiance to the Eastern emperors, 
and established a republican form of government under a duke 
of their own appointment. Under this regime Neapolis retained 
independence for nearly four hundred years, though constantly 
struggling against the powerful Lombard dukes of Benevento, who 
twice unsuccessfully besieged it. In 1027, however, Pandulf IV^, 
a Lombard prince of Capua, succeeded in making himself 
master of it; but he was expelled in 1030 by Duke Sergius, 
chiefly through the aid of a few Norman adventurers. The 
Normans, in their turn, gradually superseded all powers, whether 
Greek, Lombard or republican, which had previously divided 
the south of Italy, and furthermore checked the Saracens in the 
advances they were making through Apulia. 

From the date at which the south of Italy and Sicily were 
subjugated by the Normans the history of Naples ceases to be 
the history of a republic or a city, and becomes that of a kingdom, 
sometimes separate, sometimes merged, with the kingdom of 
Sicily, in that of the Two Sicilies. The city of Naples hence- 
forth formed the metropolis of the kingdom to which it gave its 
name, owing this pre-eminence to its advantageous position on 
the side of Italy towards Sicily, and to the favour of successive 
princes (see Naples, Kingdom of). 

Bibliography. — Ackerman, Naples and the Campagna Felice 
£1816); Craven, Tour through the Southern Provinces of Naples 
(1821); R. T. Gunther, Earth Movements in the Bay of Naples 
(Oxford, 1905); Rolfe and Ingleby, Naples in 1888 (London, 1888); 
Black, Naples in the Nineties (1897); Arthur Norway, Naples, Past 
and Present (London, 1901); Miss Jex Blake, The Elder Pliny's 
Chapters on the History of Art (London, 1896). (E. N.-R.) 

NAPLES, KINGDOM OF, the name conventionally given to the 
kingdom of Sicily on the Italian mainland (Sicily beyond the 
Pharos), to distinguish it from that of Sicily proper (Sicily on 
this side of the Pharos, i.e. Messina), the title of "King of 
Naples " having only actually been borne by Philip II. of Spain 
in the 16th century (" King of England and Naples ") and by 
Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat in the 19th. The history 
of the kingdom of Naples is inextricably interwoven with that of 
Sicily, with which for long periods it was united as the kingdom 
of the Two Sicilies. 

For the earlier history of Naples and its territory, as a republic 
and a dukedom, see Naples above, and for the coming of the 
Normans see Sicily and Normans. It is sufficient here to state 
that the leaders of the house of Hauteville, Robert Guiscard and 
Richard of Aversa, in 1059 did homage to Pope Nicholas II. (q.v.) 
for all conquests they had made both in the island and upon the 
mainland, and that in 1130 Roger de Hauteville (Roger II. as 
" great count " of Sicily) assumed the style of king as Roger I. 
In this way the south of Italy, together with the adjacent island 
of Sicily, was converted into one political body, which, owing to 
the peculiar temper of its Norman rulers and their powerful 
organization, assumed a more feudal character than any other 
part of the peninsula. The regno, as it was called by the Italians, 
constituted a state apart, differing in social institutions, foreign 
relations, and type of home government, from the commonwealths 
and tyrannies of upper Italy. The indirect right acquired by 
the popes as lords paramount over this vast section of Italian 
territory gave occasion to all the most serious disturbances of 
Italy between the end of the 13th and the beginning of the 16th 
centuries, by the introduction of the house of Anjou into Naples 
and the disputed succession of Angevin and Aragonese princes. 

Roger I. was succeeded in 1154 by William I. "the Bad," 
who died in 1166, being succeeded by his son William II. " the 
Good," on whose death in 1189 the crown passed to 
his illegitimate son Tancred. After the death of m * k t 9 
Tancred the emperor Henry VI., of the house of s^u/fens. 
Hohenstaufen, who by his marriage with Constance 
or Costanza d' Altavilla, daughter of Roger I. (d. 1154), was 
Tancred's rival for the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, de- 
scended into Italy in 1194. He easily conquered both the 
mainland and the island, and Tancred's only son William III. 
surrendered the crown to him. But with the excuse of a pre- 
tended plot he put a number of the most conspicuous persons 
in the kingdoms to death, and had William himself blinded. 
He then returned to Germany, and during his absence an agita- 
tion broke out, proyjDked by the cruelty of his lieutenants and 
encouraged by his Norman wife. He hurrieji back to Italy, 
and repressed the movement with his usual ferocity, but died 

	The
	emperor
	Frederick 

	Frederick 
	lL 

in 1197. Costanza then had her son
(b. 1194) proclaimed king, and obtained the support 
of the Holy See on condition that the kingdom should 
be once more recognized as a fief of the church. The 
whole history of the ensuing period of south Italian history 
turns on the claims of the papacy over the kingdoms of Naples 
and Sicily, based on the recognition of papal suzerainty in 1053. 
The Hohenstaufen kings refused to admit this claim; hence the 
persistent hostility of the popes and the calling in of foreign 
potentates and armies. Costanza died in 1198, leaving Pope 
Innocent III. regent and tutor to her son; the pope's authority 
was contested by various nobles, but in 1209 Frederick married 
Costanza, daughter of the king of Aragon, with whose help he 
succeeded in reducing a large part of Sicily to obedience. Two 
years later he was elected king of the Romans at the diet 
of Nuremberg in opposition to Otto IV., and in 1220 he was 
crowned emperor in Rome by pope Honorius III., but continued 
to reside in Sicily. He quelled a rising of Sicilian barons and 
Saracens, and confined 60,000 of the latter at Lucera in Capi- 
tanata, where they ended by becoming a most loyal colony. 
After the death of Frederick's wife Pope Honorius III. arranged 
a marriage for him with Yolande, daughter of John of Brienne 
(1225). But in 1227 Gregory IX. excommunicated him because 
he delayed the crusade which he had promised to undertake; 
and although he sailed the following year, and concluded a 
treaty with the sultan of Egypt whereby the kingdom of 
Jerusalem was re-established, the pope was not satisfied and 
sent an army into Neapolitan territory. On his return Frederick 
defeated the pontificals, and in 1230 peace was made at San 
Germano and the excommunication withdrawn. In 1231 he 
issued the celebrated Constitutions of the Sicilian kingdom at 
the parliament of Melfi. He had further quarrels with successive 
pontiffs, and was excommunicated more than once. In 1246 a 
number of his own barons and officials of the mainland conspired 
against his rule, but were crushed with great ferocity, and even 
his faithful secretary, Pietro della Vigna, fell a victim to the 
emperor's suspicions. Frederick's last years were embittered 
by the hostilities following on the crusade which the pope pro- 
claimed against him and by rebellions in Naples and Sicily. 
He died in 1250. His policy was anti-feudal and fended to 
concentrate power into his own hands; hence the frequent 
risings of the barons. His court at Palermo had been pne of the 
most brilliant in Europe, and attracted learned men from all 
over the then known world; his somewhat pagan philosophy 
was afterwards regarded as marking the beginnings of modern 
rationalism. He opened schools and universities, and he himself 
wrote poetry in Sicilian dialect. 

His son Conrad IV. succeeded to the empire, while to his 
illegitimate son Manfred he left the principality of Taranto 
Manfred an ^ ^ e re S encv °f tne southern kingdom, to be held 
in. Conrad's name. By his political sagacity and 
moderation Manfred won a strong party to his side and helped 
Conrad to subjugate the rebellious barons. The emperor died in 
1254, leaving an infant son, Conradin(b. 1252), and Manfred was 
appointed vicar-general during the latter's minority. Manfred, 
too, encountered the hostility of the popes, against whom he had 
to wage war, generally with success, and of some of the barons 
whom the papacy encouraged to rebel; and in 1258, on a rumour 
of Conradin's death, he was offered and accepted the crown of 
Naples and Sicily. The rumour proved false, but he retained 
the crown, promising to leave the kingdom to Conradin at his 
death and to defend his rights. He now became head of 
the Ghibellines or Imperialists of Italy, and his position was 
strengthened by the marriage of his daughter Costanza to Peter, 
son of King James of Aragon. But he met with opposition from 
the turbulent nobility and the clergy, who had been deprived 
of many privileges, and he failed to conciliate the communes, 
which were oppressed by taxes and beginning to aspire to 
autonomy. Innocent IV., in his determination to crush the 
Hohenstaufens, offered the kingdom in turn to Richard, earl 
of Cornwall, to Edward, son of Henry III. of England, and to 
Charles of Anjou, brother of Louis IX. of France. After long 
negotiations jvith successive popes, Charles was finally induced 
by Clement IV. to come to Italy in 1265, agreeing to accept 
the kingdom of the Two Sicilies as a fief of the church, and 
in 1266 he marched southward with the privileges of Ch fe r 
a crusader (see Charles I., king of Naples and Sicily). 
The defection of many cities and nobles facilitated his task, 
and Manfred was forced to retire on Benevento, where, on the 
26th of February, owing to the treachery of a part of his troops, 
he was defeated and killed. As a result of this victory Charles 
was soon master of almost the whole kingdom, and he entered 
Naples, which now became the capital instead of Palermo. 
He persecuted the nobles who had sided with Manfred, and 
established a military despotism which proved more oppressive " 
than that of the Hohenstaufens had ever been. Old laws, 
customs 'and immunities were ruthlessly swept away, the people 
were ground down with taxes, and the highest positions and 
finest estates conferred on French and Provencal nobles. Al- 
though the southern Italians had long been ruled by foreigners, 
it was the Angevin domination which thoroughly denationalized 
them, and initiated that long period of corruption, decadence 
and foreign slavery which only ended in the 19th century. 

Invited by Sicilian malcontents and Ghibellines, Conradin 
(Ital. Corradino), the last surviving Hohenstaufen, descended 
into Italy in 1 267 at the head of a small army collected conradi 
in Germany, and he found many supporters; but 
King Charles on hearing of his arrival abandoned the siege 
of Lucera and came to intercept him. A battle took place 
at Tagliacozzo (August 23rd, 1268), in which the Imperialists 
were defeated, and Conradin himself was subsequently caught 
and handed over to Charles, who had him tried for high treason 
and beheaded (see Conradin). All who had assisted the un- 
fortunate youth were cruelly persecuted, and the inhabitants 
of Agosta put to the sword. Thus ended the power of the 
Hohenstaufens. Although the picturesque figures of Manfred 
and Conradin awakened sympathy among the people of the 
kingdom, their authority was never really consolidated and their 
German knights were hated; which facts rendered the enterprise 
of another foreigner like the Angevin comparatively easy. 

In Sicily, however, Charles's government soon made itself 
odious by its exactions, the insolence and cruelty of the king's 
French officials and favourites, the depreciation of 
the currency, and the oppressive personal services, Sicilian 
while the nobles were incensed at the violation of y cs pers* 
their feudal constitution. Just as Charles was con- 
templating an expedition to the East, the Sicilians rose in revolt, 
massacring the French throughout the island. The malcontents 
were led by the Salernitan noble Giovanni da Procida, a friend 
of the emperor Frederick and of Manfred, who had taken refuge 
at the court of Peter III. of Aragon, husband of Manfred's 
daughter Costanza. He had induced Peter to make good his 
somewhat shadowy claims to the crown of Sicily, but while 
preparations were being made for the expedition, the popular 
rising known as the Sicilian Vespers, which resulted in the mass- 
acre of nearly all the French in the island, broke out at Palermo 
on Easter Day 1282. Peter reached Palermo in September, 
and by the following month had captured Messina, the last 
French stronghold. Pope Martin IV. now proclaimed a crusade 
against the Aragonese, and the war continued for many years. 
The Sicilian fleet under Ruggiero di Lauria defeated that of 
the Angevins at Malta in 1283, and 1284 in the Bay of Naples, 
where the king's son, Charles the Lame, was captured. Charles I. 
died in 1286, and, his heir being a prisoner, his grandson, Charles 
Martel (d. 1295), assumed the regency. Peter died the same 
year, leaving Aragon to his son Alphonso III. and Sicily to his 
son James, who was consecrated king in spite of the interdict. 
The war went on uninterruptedly, for the 'popes prevented all 
attempts to arrive at an understanding, as they were determined 
that the rights of the church should be fully recognized. Charles 
ch 1 u *k e Lame, who had been liberated in 1288, having 

renounced his rights on Sicily, was absolved from 
his oath by Pope Nicholas IV., who crowned him king of 
the Two Sicilies and excommunicated Alphonso. The latter's 
successor James made peace with Boniface VIII. by renouncing 
Sicily (in exchange for Sardinia and Corsica and the hand of 
Charles's daughter) and promising to help the Angevins to 
reconquer the island. But the Sicilians, led by James's brother, 

Frederick III., 1 who had been governor of the island 
IIt and was now proclaimed king, determined to resist. 

The war went on with varying success, until Charles 
of Valois, summoned by the pope to conduct the campaign, 
landed in Sicily and, his army being decimated by disease, 
made peace with Frederick at Caltabellotta (1302). The 
Angevins renounced Sicily in favour of Frederick, who was 
recognized as king of Trinacria (a name adopted so as not to 
mention that of Sicily), and he was to marry Leonora, daughter 
of Charles of Valois; at his death the island would revert to 
the Angevins, but his children would receive compensation else- 
where. In 1303 the pope unwillingly ratified the treaty. (Sec 
Charles II., king of Naples and Sicily, and Frederick III., 
king of Sicily.) 

Charles II. died in 1309 and was succeeded by his second son 
Robert. (His eldest son had predeceased him, leaving a son, 
Charles Robert, or Caroberto, at this time king of 
Hungary.) Robert now became leader of the Guelphs 
in Italy, and war between Naples and Sicily broke out once more, 
when Frederick allied himself with the emperor Henry VII. 
on his descent into Italy, and proclaimed his own son Peter 
heir to the throne. Robert led or sent many devastating expedi- 
tions into Sicily, and hostilities continued under King Peter 
even after Frederick's death in 1337. Peter died in 1342, leaving 
an infant son Louis; but just as Robert was preparing for 
another expedition he too diedjn the same year. Robert had 
been a capable ruler, a scholar and a friend of Petrarch, but he 
lost influence as a Guelph leader owing to the rise of other power- 
ful princes and republics, while in Naples itself his authority 
was limited by the rights of a turbulent and rebellious baronage 
(see Robert, king of Naples). His son Charles had died in 
1328 and he was succeeded by his granddaughter Joanna, 
wife of Andrew of Hungary, but the princes of the blood 
Joanna I. anc * ^ e Darons stirred up trouble, and in 1345 Andrew 
was assassinated by order of Catherine, widow of 
Philip, son of Charles II., and of several nobles, not without 
suspicion of Joanna's complicity. 

Andrew's brother Louis, king of Hungary, now came to Italy 
to make good his claims on Naples and avenge the murder of 
Andrew. With the help of some of the barons he drove Joanna 
and her second husband, Louis of Taranto, from the kingdom, 
and murdered Charles of Durazzo; but as Pope Clement refused 
to recognize his claims he went back to Hungary in 1348, and 
the fickle barons recalled Joanna, who returned and carried on 
desultory warfare with the partisans of Louis of Hungary. 
Louis of Taranto and Joanna were crowned at Naples by the 
pope's legate in 1352, but Niccolo Acciaiuoli, the seneschal, 
became the real master of the kingdom. In 1374 Joanna made 
peace with Frederick of Sicily, recognizing him as king of 
Trinacria on condition that he paid her tribute and recognized 
the pope's suzerainty. She nominated Louis of Anjou her 
heir, but while the latter was recognized by the antipope 
Clement VII,, Pope Urban VI. declared Charles of Durazzo 
(great-grandson of Charles II.) king of Sicily ol di qua del 
Faro {i.e. of Naples). Charles conquered the kingdom and took 
Joanna prisoner in 1381, and had her murdered the following 

	*He was the second king of that name in Sicily, but was known as 
	Frederick III. because he was the third son of King Peter. 

year. Louis, although assisted by Amadeus VI. of Savoy, failed 
to drive out Charles, and died in 1384. Charles III. died two 
years later and the kingdom was plunged into anarchy 
once more, part of the barons siding with his seven- ffi? HeS 
year-old son Ladislas, and part with Louis II. of 
Anjou. The latter was crowned by the antipope Clement, 
while Urban regarded both him and his rival as usurpers. On 
Urban 's death in 1389 Boniface IX. crowned Ladislas 
king of Naples, who by the year 1400 had expelled 
Louis and made himself master of the kingdom. In 1407 he 
occupied Rome, which Gregory XII. could not hold. But 
Alexander V., elected pope by the council of Pisa, turned against 
Ladislas and recognized Louis. Ladislas was defeated in 141 1 
and driven from Rome, but reoccupied the city on Louis's 
return to France. He died in 1414, and was succeeded by his 
sister Joanna II. {q.v.), during whose reign the kingdom , „ 
sank to the lowest depths of degradation. In 1415 
Joanna married James of Bourbon, who kept his wife in a state 
of semi-confinement, murdered her lover, Pandolfo Alopo, and 
imprisoned her chief captain, Sforza; but his arrogance drove 
the barons to rebellion, and they made him renounce the royal 
dignity and abandon the kingdom. The history of the next 
few years is a maze of intrigues between Joanna, Sforza, Giovanni 
Caracciolo, the queen's new lover, Alphonso of Aragon, whom 
she adopted as her heir, and Louis III. of Anjou, whom we find 
pitted against each other in every possible combination. Louis 
died in 1434 and Joanna in 1435 (see Joanna II., queen of Naples). 
The succession was disputed by Rene of Anjou and Alphonso, 
but the former eventually renounced his claims and Alphonso 
was recognized as king of Naples by Pope Eugenius IV. in 1443. 

Under Alphonso, surnamed "the Magnanimous," Sicily was 
once more united to Naples and a new era was inaugurated, for 
the king was at once a brilliant ruler, a scholar and 
a patron of letters. He died in 1458, leaving Naples ^£^i** 
to his illegitimate son Ferdinand I. (Don Ferrante), aaaimous. 
and Sicily, Sardinia and Aragon to his brother John. 
Ferdinand found, however, that Alphonso .had not really con- 
solidated his power, and he had practically to reconquer the 
whole country. By 1464 he was master of the situa- 
tion, in spite of the attempt of Pope Calixtus III. ; 
to enforce the claims of the papacy, and that of 
John of Anjou to enter into the heritage of^his ancestors. In 
alliance with Pope Sixtus IV. and the Milanese he waged war 
on Lorenzo de' Medici in 1479; but that astute ruler, by 
visiting Ferdinand in person, obtained peace on favourable 
terms (1479). In 1485 the disaffection of the barons, due to 
the king's harshness and the arrogance and cruelty of his son, 
found vent in a revolt led by Roberto Sanseverino and Francesco 
Coppola, which was crushed by means of craft and treachery. 
Ferdinand died in 1494 full of forebodings as to the probable 
effects of the invasion of Charles VIII. of France, and Tb€ 
was succeeded by Alphonso (see Ferdinand I., king of invasion 
Naples). The French king entered Italy in September of Charles 
1495, and conquered the Neapolitan kingdom without yuu 
much difficulty. Alphonso abdicated, his son Ferrandino and 
his brother Frederick withdrew to Ischia, and only a few towns 
in Apulia still held out for the Aragonese. But when the pope, 
the emperor, Spain and Venice, alarmed at Charles's progress, 
formed a defensive league against him, he quitted Naples, and 
Ferrandino, with the help of Ferdinand II. of Spain, was able 
to reoccupy his dominions. He died much regretted in 1496 
and was succeeded by Frederick. The country was torn by 
civil war and brigandage, and the French continued to press 
their claims; and although Louis XII. . (who had succeeded 
Charles VIII.) concluded a treaty with Ferdinand of Spain for 
the partition of Naples, France and Spain fell out in 1502 over 
the division of the spoi!s > and with Gonzalo de Cordoba's victory 
on the Garigliano in December 1502, the whole kingdom was 
in Spanish hands. 

On the death of Ferdinand in 151 6, the Habshurg Charles 
became king of Spain, and three years later was elected emperor 
as Charles V.; in 1522 he appointed John de Lannoy viceroy of 

	Revolutlons. 

Masaalello. 

Naples, which became henceforth an integral part of the Spanish 
dominions. The old divisions of nobility, clergy and people were 
Na lesa maintained and their mutual rivalry encouraged; the 
Spanish nobles were won over by titles and by the splendour 
posses- of the viceregal court, but many persons of low birth 
slot*. w jj s howed talent were raised to high positions. 

The viceroy was assisted by the Collateral Council and the Sacred 
College of Santa Chiara, composed of Spanish and Italian 
members, and there was an armed force of the two nationalities. 
Spanish rule on the whole was oppressive and tyrannical, and 
based solely on the idea that the dependencies must pay tribute 
to the dominant kingdom. During the rule of Don Pedro de 
Toledo (one of the best viceroys) Naples became the centre of 
a Protestant movement which spread to the rest of Italy, but 
was ultimately crushed by the Inquisition. In Sicily Spanish 
rule was less absolute, for the island had not been conquered, 
but had given itself over voluntarily to the Aragonese; and the 
parliament, formed by the three bracci or orders (the militate 
consisting of the nobility, the ecclesiasticOj of the clergy, and the 
demaniale, of the communes), imposed certain limitations on 
the viceroy, who had to play off the three bracci against each 
other. But the oppressive character of the government provoked 
several rebellions. In 1598 an insurrection, headed 
by the philosopher Tommaso Campanella, broke out 
in Calabria, and was crushed with great severity. 
In 1647, during the viceroyalty of the marquis de Los Leres in 
Sicily, bread riots in Palermo became a veritable revolution, 
and the people, led by the goldsmith Giovanni d' Alessio, drove 
the viceroy from the city; but the nobles, fearing for their 
privileges, took the viceroy's part and turned the people against 
d' Alessio, who yas murdered, and Los Leres returned. On the 
7th of July 1647, tumults occurred at Naples in consequence of 
a new fruit tax, and the viceroy, Count d* Arcos, was forced 
to take refuge in the Castelnuovo. The populace, led by an 
Amalfi fisherman, known as Masaniello (?.tf.), obtained 
arms, erected barricades, and, while professing loyalty 
to the king of Spain, demanded the removal of the oppressive 
taxes and murdered many of the nobles. D' Arcos came to terms 
with Masaniello; but in spite of this, and of the assassination 
of Masaniello, whose arrogance and ferocity had made him 
unpopular, the disturbances continued, and again the viceroy 
had to retire to Castelnuovo and make concessions. Even the 
arrival of reinforcements from Spain failed to restore order, and 
the new popular leader, Gennaro Annese, now sought assistance 
from the French, and invited the duke of Guise to come to Naples. 
The duke came with some "soldiers and ships; but failed to effect 
anything; and after the recall of d 7 Arcos the new viceroy, 
Count d'Ognate, having come to an arrangement with Annese 
and got Guise out of the city, proceeded to punish all who had 
taken part in the disturbances, and had Annese and a number 
of others beheaded. 

In 1670 disorders broke out at Messina. They began with a 
riot between the nobles and the burghers, but ended in an anti- 
Spanish movement; and while the inhabitants called 
vofuUoaat * n t ^ ae French, the Spaniards, who could not crush the 
Messiaa, rising, called in the Dutch. Louis XIV. sent a fleet 
under the due de Vivonne to Sicily, which defeated 
the Dutch under de Ruyter in 1676. But at the peace of 
Nijmwegen (1679) Louis treacherously abandoned the Mcssinese,' 
who suffered cruel persecution at the hands of the Spaniards 
and lost all their privileges. An anti-Spanish conspiracy of 
Neapolitan nobles, led by Macchia, with the object of proclaiming 
the archduke Charles of Austria king of Naples, was discovered; 
but in 1707 an Austrian army conquered the kingdom, and 
Spanish rule came to an end after 203 years, during which it had 
succeeded in thoroughly demoralizing the people. 
In Sicily the Spaniards held their own until the peace of 
Utrecht in 1713, when the island was given over to Duke 
undfr Victor of Savoy, who assumed the title of king. In 
Savoy, r 7!8 he had to hand back his new possession to 
Spain, who, in 1720, surrendered it to Austria and gave 
Sardinia to Victor Amadeus. In 1733 the treaty of the Escurial 

	Charles 
	ill. 

between France, Spain and Savoy against Austria was signed. 
Don Carlos of Bourbon, son of Philip V. of Spain, easily conquered 
both Naples and Sicily, and in 1738 he was recognized as king 
of the Two Sicilies, Spain renouncing all her claims. 
Charles was well received, for the country now was an 
independent kingdom once more. With the Tuscan 
Bernardo Tanucci as his minister, he introduced many useful 
reforms, improved the army, which was thus able to repel an 
Austrian invasion in 1744, embellished the city of Naples and 
built roads. In 1759 Charles III., having succeeded to the 
Spanish crown, abdicated that of the Two Sicilies in favour of his 
son Ferdinand, who became Ferdinand IV. of Naples and III. 
of Sicily. Being only eight years old, a regency under Tanucci 
was appointed, and the young king's education was 
purposely neglected by the minister, who wished to /K# 
dominate him completely. The regency ended in 1767, 
and the following year Ferdinand married the masterful and 
ambitious Maria Carolina, daughter of the empress Maria Theresa. 
She had Tanucci dismissed and set herself to the task of making 
Naples a great power. With the help of John Acton, an English- 
man whom she made minister in the place of Tanucci, she freed 
Naples from Spanish influence and secured a rapprochement 
with England and Austria. 

On the outbreak of the French Revolution the king and queen 
were not at first hostile to the new movement; but after the 
fall of the French monarchy they became violently opposed to 
it, and in 1793 joined the first coalition against France, instituting 
severe persecutions against all who were remotely suspected of 
French sympathies. Republicanism, however, gained ground, 
especially among the aristocracy. ^ In 1796 peace with France 
was concluded, but in 1798, during Napoleon's absence in Egypt 
and after Nelson's victory at Aboukir, Maria Carolina induced 
Ferdinand to go to war with France once more. Nelson arrived 
in Naples in September, where he was enthusiastically received. 
The king, after a somewhat farcical occupation of Rome, which 
had been evacuated by the French, hurried back to Naples as 
soon as the French attacked his troops, and although the lazzaroni 
(the lowest class of the people) were devoted to the dynasty 
and ready to defend it, he fled with the court to Palermo in a 
panic on board Nelson's ships. The wildest confusion prevailed, 
and the lazzaroni jnassacred numbers of persons suspected of 
republican sympathies, while the nobility and the educated 
classes, finding themselves abandoned by their king in this 
cowardly manner, began to contemplate a republic under French 
auspices as their only means of salvation from anarchy. In 
January 1799 the French under Championnet reached 
Naples, but the lazzaroni, ill-armed and ill-disciplined ^* cA /a 
as they were, ' resisted the enemy with desperate ^ ap i es 
courage, and it was not until the 20th that the invaders aad the 
were masters of the city. On the 23rd the Partheno- Parthcno- 
paean republic was proclaimed. The Republicans were ^J/J//^ 
men of culture and high character, but doctrinaire and 
unpractical, and they knew very little of the lower classes of 
their own country. The government soon found itself in financial 
difficulties, owing to Championnet's demands for money; it 
failed to organize the army, and met with scant success in its 
attempts to "democratize " the provinces. Meanwhile the court 
at Palermo sent Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo, a wealthy 
and influential prelate, to Calabria, to organize a Ruffo 
counter-revolution. He succeeded beyond expectation, aad the 
and with his " Christian army of the Holy Faith " s *°' 
(Esercito Cristiano della Santa Fede), consisting of 
brigands, convicts, peasants and some soldiers, marched through 
the kingdom plundering, burning and massacring. An English 
squadron approached Naples and occupied the island of Procida, 
but after a few engagements with the Republican fleet com- 
manded by Caracciolo, an ex-officer in the Bourbon navy, it was 
recalled to Palermo, as the Franco-Spanish fleet was expected. 
Ruffo, with the addition of some Russian and Turkish allies, 
now marched on the capital, whence the French, save for a 
small force under Mejean, withdrew. The scattered Republican 
detachments were defeated, only Naples and Pescara holding 

	Nelson at 
	Naples* 

out. On the 13th of June Ruffo and his hordes reached Naples, 
and after a desperate battle at the Ponte deila Maddalena, 
entered the city. For weeks the Calabresi and lozzarani continued 
to pillage and massacre, and Ruffo was unable, even if willing, 
to restrain them. But the Royalists were not masters of the city, 
for the French in Castel Sant* Elmo and the Republicans in 
Castelnuovo and Castel dell' Uovo still held out and bombarded 
the streets, while the Franco-Spanish fleet might arrive at any 
moment. Consequently Ruffo was desperately anxious to come 
to terms with the Republicans for the evacuation of the castles, 
in spite of the queen's orders to make no terms with the rebels. 
After some negotiation an armistice was concluded and a capitu- 
lation agreed upon, whereby the castles were to be evacuated, 
the hostages liberated and the garrisons free to remain in Naples 
unmolested or to sail for Toulon. 

While the vessels were being prepared for the voyage to 
Toulon all the hostages in the castles were liberated save four; 
but on the 24th of June Nelson arrived with his fleet, 
and on hearing of the capitulation he refused to 
recognize it save in so far as it concerned the French. 
Ruffo indignantly declared that once the treaty was signed, 
not only by himself but by the Russian and Turkish commandants 
and by the British captain Foote, it must be respected, and on 
Nelson's refusal he said that he would not help him to capture 
the castles. On the 26th Nelson changed his attitude and 
authorized Sir William Hamilton, the British minister, to inform 
the cardinal that he (Nelson) would do nothing to break the 
armistice; while Captains Bell and Troubridge wrote that they 
had Nelson's authority to state that the latter would not oppose 
the embarcation of the Republicans. Although these expressions 
were equivocal, the Republicans were satisfied and embarked 
on the vessels prepared for them. But on the 28th Nelson 
received despatches from the court (in reply to his own), in conse- 
quence of which he had the vessels brought under the guns of his 
ships, and many of the Republicans were arrested. Caracciolo, 
who had been caught whilst attempting to escape from Naples, 
was tried by a court-martial of Royalist ofl&cers under Nelson's 
auspices on board the admiral's flagship, condemned to death 
and hanged at the yard arm. For the part played by Nelson 
in these transactions see the articles Caracciolo and Nelson. 
On the 8th of July, King Ferdinand arrived from Palermo, 
and the state trials, conducted in the most arbitrary fashion, 
resulted in wholesale butchery; hundreds of persons 
vengeance. were executed, including some of the best men in the 
* country, such as the philosopher Mario Pagano. the 
scientist Cirillo, Manthone, the minister of war under the re- 
public, Massa, the defender of Castel dell' Uovo, and Ettore 
Caraffa, the defender of Pescara, who had been captured by 
treachery, while thousands of others were immured in horrible 
dungeons or exiled. 

War with France continued until March 1801, when peace 
was made, and after the peace of Amiens in 1802 the court 
returned to Naples, where it was well received. But when the 
European war broke out again in the following year, Napoleon 
(then first consul) became very exacting in his demands on 
King Ferdinand, who consequently played a double game, 
appearing to accede to these demands while negotiating with 
England. After Austerlitz Napoleon revenged himself by de- 
claring that " the Bourbon dynasty had ceased to reign," and 
sent an army under his brother Joseph to occupy the kingdom. 

Ferdinand and Maria Carolina fled to Palermo in January 
1805; in February 1806 Joseph Bonaparte entered Naples 
as king. A cultivated, well-meaning, not very in- 
Bonaparte. telligent man, he introduced many useful reforms on 
a basis of benevolent despotism, abolished feudalism 
and built roads, but the taxes and forced contributions which 
he levied proved very burdensome. Joseph's authority did not 
exist throughout a large part of the kingdom, where royalist 
risings, led by brigand chiefs, maintained a state of anarchy, 
and a British force under Sir John Stuart, which landed in 
Calabria from Sicily, defeated the French at Maida (July 6th, 
1806). Both the French and the royalists committed atrocities, 
and many conspirators in Naples were tried by the French 
state courts and shot. 

In 1808 Napoleon conferred the crown of Spain on Joseph, 
and appointed Joachim Murat king of Naples. Murat continued 
Joseph's reforms, swept away many old abuses and 
reorganized the army; and although he introduced Mural™ 
the French codes and conferred many appointments 
and estates on Frenchmen, his administration was more or less 
native, and he favoured the abler Neapolitans. His attempts 
to attack the English in Sicily ended disastrously, but he succeeded 
in crushing brigandage in Calabria by means of General Manhes, 
who, however, had to resort to methods of ferocity in order to 
do so. The king, owing to his charm of manner, his handsome 
face, and his brilliant personality, gained many sympathies, 
and began to aspire to absolute independence. He gradually 
became estranged from Napoleon, and although he followed 
him to Russia and afterwards took part in the German campaign, 
he secretly opened negotiations with Austria and Great Britain. 
In January 1814 he signed a treaty with Austria, each power 
guaranteeing the dominions of the other, while Sicily was to 
be left to Ferdinand. The following month he proclaimed 
his separation from Napoleon and marched against Eugene 
Beauharnais, the French viceroy of Lombardy. But no important 
engagements took place, and when Napoleon escaped from Elba, 
Murat suddenly returned to the allegiance of his old chief. He 
marched at the head of 35,000 men into northern Italy, and 
from Rimini issued his famous proclamation in favour of Italian 
independence, which at the time fell on deaf ears (March 30th, 
1815). He was subsequently defeated by the Austrians several 
times and forced to retreat, and on the 18th of May he sailed from 
Naples for France (see Murat, Joachim). Generals Guglielmo 
Pepe and Carrascosa now concluded a treaty with the Austrians 
at Casalanza on favourable terms, and on the 23rd the Austrians 
entered Naples to restore Bourbon rule. 

Ferdinand and Maria Carolina had continued to reign in Sicily, 
where the extravagance of the court and the odious Neapolitan 
system ' of police espionage rendered' their presence 
a burden instead of a blessing to the island. The king Q e ur fy 0ns 
obtained a subsidy from Great Britain and allowed in Sicily. 
British troops to occupy Messina and Agosta, so that 
they might operate against the French on the mainland. A 
bitter conflict broke out between the court and the parliament, 
and the British minister, Lord William Bentinck, favoured the 
opposition, forced Ferdinand to resign his authority and appoint 
his son regent and introduced many valuable reforms. The 
queen perpetually intrigued against Bentinck, and The 
even negotiated with the French, but in 181 2 a more English 
liberal constitution on British lines was introduced, and c t ^ iIiu ' 
a Liberal ministry under the princes of Castelnuovo 
and Belmonte appointed, while the queen was exiled in the 
following year. But after the fall of Napoleon Sicily ceased to 
have any importance for Great Britain, and Bentinck, whose 
memory is still cherished in the island, departed in 1814. 
Ferdinand succeeded in getting a reactionary ministry appointed, 
and dissolved parliament in May 1815, after concluding a treaty 
with Austria — now freed by Murat's defection from her engage- 
ments with him — for the recovery of his mainland dominions 
by means of an Austrian army paid for by himself. On the 
oth of June Ferdinand re-entered Naples and bound ike 
himself in a second treaty with Austria not to introduce restora- 
a constitutional government; 1 but at first he abstained iJ OD i£ /T 
from persecution and received many of Murat's old 
officers into his army in accordance with the treaty of Casalanza. 
In October 1815 Murat, believing that he still had a strong 
party in the kingdom, landed with a few companions at Pizzo 

	1 The secret article of the treaty of June 12, 1815, runs as follows: 
	11 H.M. the King of the Two Sicilies, in re-establishing the govern- 
	ment of the kingdom, will not agree to any changes irreconcilable 
	either with the ancient institutions of the monarchy or with the 
	principles adopted by H.I. and R. Austrian Majesty for the internal 
	regime of his Italian provinces." It is to be noted that this did not 
	involve the obligation of interfering with the ancient constitution of 
	Sicily, which Metternich desired to see remain undisturbed. 

	di Calabria, but was immediately captured by the police and the 
	peasantry, court-martialled and shot. 

Ferdinand to some extent maintained French legislation, 
but otherwise reorganized the state with Metternich's approval 
on Bourbon lines; he proclaimed himself king of the Two Sicilies 
at the congress of Vienna, incorporating Naples and Sicily into 
one state, and abolished the Sicilian constitution (December 
1816). In 1818 he concluded a Concordat with the Church, 
by which the latter renounced its suzerainty over the kingdom, 
but was given control over education, the censorship and many 
other privileges. But there was much disaffection throughout 
the country, and the Carbonarist lodges, founded in 
The Murat's time with the object of freeing the country 
of 1820. from foreign rule and obtaining a constitution, had 
•made much progress (see Carbonari). The army 
indeed was honeycombed with Carbonari, and General Pepe, 
himself a member of the society, organized them on a military 
basis. In July 1820 a military mutiny broke out at Caserta, 
led by two officers and a priest, the mutineers demanding a 
constitution although professing loyalty to the king. Ferdinand, 
feeling himself helpless to resist, acceded to the demand, appointed 
a ministry composed of Murat's old adherents, and entrusted 
his authority to his son. The ultra-democratic single-chamber 
Spanish constitution of 1812 was introduced, but proved utterly 
unworkable. The new government's first difficulty was Sicily, 
where the people had risen in rebellion demanding their own 
charter of 1812, and although the Neapolitan troops quelled 
the outbreak with much bloodshed the division proved fatal 
to the prospects of'ttberty. 

The outbreak of the military rising in Naples, following so 
shortly on that in Spain, seriously alarmed the powers responsible 
for the preservation of the peace in Europe. The position was 
complicated by the somewhat enigmatic attitude of Russia; 
for the Neapolitan Liberals, with many of whom Count Capo 
d' Istria, the Russian minister of foreign affairs, had been on 
friendly terms, proclaimed that they had the " moral support " 
of the tsar. This idea, above all, it was necessary for Austria 
to destroy once for all. The diplomatic negotiations are discussed 
in the article on the history of Europe (q.v.). Here it suffices to 
say that these issued in the congress of Troppau (October 1820) 
and the proclamation of the famous Troppau protocol affirming 
the right of collective/' Europe " to interfere to crush dangerous 
internal revolutions. Both France and Great Britain protested 
against the general principle laid down in this instrument; but 
neither of them approved of the Neapolitan revolution, and 
neither of them was opposed to an intervention in Naples, 
provided this were carried out, not on the ground of a supposed 
right of Europe to interfere, but by Austria for Austrian ends. 
By general consent King Ferdinand was invited to attend the 
adjourned congress, fixed to meet at Laibach in the spring of 
the following year. Under the new constitution, the permission 
of parliament was necessary before the king could leave Neapolitan 
territory; but this was weakly granted, after Ferdinand had 
sworn the most solemn oaths to maintain the constitution. He 
was scarcely beyond the frontiers, however, before he repudiated 
his engagements, as exacted by force. A cynicism so unblushing 
shocked even the seasoned diplomats of the congress, who would 
have preferred that the king should have made a decent show 
of yielding to force. The result was, however, that the powers 
authorized Austria to march an army into Naples to restore 
the autocratic monarchy. This decision was notified to the 
Neapolitan government by Russia, Prussia and Austria — Great 
Britain and France maintaining a strict neutrality. Meanwhile 
the regent, in spite of his declaration that he would lead the 
Neapolitan army against the invader, was secretly undermining 
the position of the government, and there were divisions of opinion 

in the ranks of the Liberals themselves. General Pepe 
Austrians was sent t0 t ^ ie lront i er at tne nea ^ of 8000 men, but 
la Naples. wa s completely defeated by the Austrians at Rieti 
on the 7th of March. On the 23rd the Austrians 
entered Naples, followed soon afterwards by the king; every 
vestige of freedom was suppressed, the reactionary Medici 
ministry appointed, and the inevitable state trials instituted 
with the usual harvest of executions and imprisonment. Pepe 
saved himself by flight. (See Ferdinand IV., king of Naples.) 

Ferdinand died in 1825, and his son and successor, Francis I., 
an unbridled libertine, at once threw off the mask of Liberalism; 
the corruption of the administration under Medici 
assumed unheard-of proportions, and every office was 
openly sold. The Austrian occupation lasted until 1827, having 
cost the state 310,000,000 lire; but in the meanwhile the 
Swiss Guard had been established as a further protection for 
autocracy, and the revolutionary outbreak at Bosco on the 
Cilento was suppressed with the usual cruelty. (See Francis 
I., king of the Two Sicilies.) 

Francis died in 1830 and was succeeded by his son, Ferdinand 
II., who at first awoke hopes that the conditions of the country 
would be improved. He was not devoid of good 
qualities, and took an interest in the material welfare w< 
of the country, but he was narrow-minded, ignorant 
and bigoted; he made the administration more efficient, and re- 
organized the army which became purged of Carbonarism, and 
such Carbonarist plots as there were in the 'thirties were not 
severely punished. Ferdinand was impatient of Austrian in- 
fluence, but on the death of his first wife, Cristina of Savoy, he 
married Maria Theresa of Austria, who encouraged him in his 
reactionary tendencies and brought him closer to Austria. An 
outbreak of cholera in 1837 led to disorders in Sicily, which, 
having assumed a political character, were repressed by Del 
Caretto with great severity. The government tended to become 
more and more autocratic and to rely wholly on the all-powerful 
police, the spies and the priests; and, although the king showed 
some independence in foreign affairs, his popularity waned; the 
desire for a constitution was by no means dead, and the survivors 
of the old Carbonari gathered round Carlo Poerio, while the 
Giovane Italia society (independent of Mazzini), led by Benedetto 
Musolino, took as its motto " Unity, Liberty and Independence." 
But as yet the idea of unity made but little headway, for southern 
Italy was too widely separated by geographical conditions, 
history, tradition and custom from the rest of the peninsula, 
and the majority of the Liberals — themselves a minority of the 
population — merely aspired to a constitutional Neapolitan 
monarchy, possibly forming part of a confederation of Italian 
states. The attempt of the Giovane Italia to bring about a 
general revolution in 1843 only resulted in a few sporadic out- 
breaks easily crushed. The following year the Venetian brothers 
Bandiera/ acting in concert with Mazzini, landed in 
Calabria, believing the whole country to be in a state Z he ., 
of revolt; they met with little local support and were attempt! 
quickly captured and shot, but their death aroused 
much sympathy, and the whole episode was highly significant 
as being the first attempt made by north Italians to promote 
revolution in the south. In 1847 a pamphlet by L. Settembrini, 
entitled " A Protest of the People of the Two Sicilies/* appeared 
anonymously and created a deep impression as a most scathing 
indictment of the government; and at the same time the 
election of Pius IX., a pope who was believed to be a Liberal, 
caused widespread excitement throughout Italy. Conspiracy 
was now rife both in Naples and Sicily, but as yet there was no 
idea of deposing the king. Many persons were arrested, including 
Carlo Poerio, who, however, continued to direct the agitation. 

On the 12th of January 1848 a revolution under the leadership 
of Ruggiero Settimo broke out at Palermo to the cry of " in- 
dependence or the 181 2 constitution," and by the end 
of February the whole island, with the exception of The 
Messina, was in the hands of the revolutionists. These ^ sictly. 
events were followed by demonstrations at Naples; 
the king summoned a meeting of generals and members of his 
family on the 27th of January, and on the advice of Filangieri 
{q.v.), who said that the army was not to be relied upon, he 
dismissed the Pietracatella ministry and Del Caretto, and 
summoned the duke of Serracapriola to form another administra- 
tion. On the 28th he granted the constitution, and the Liberals 
Bozzelli and Carlo Poerio afterwards joined the cabinet. The 
popular demand was now that Naples should assist the Lombards 
in their revolt against Austria, for a feeling of Italian solidarity 
The was growing up. The ministry of Carlo Troya suc- 
ceeded to that of Serracapriola, and after the parlia- 
mentary elections, in which many extreme Radicals 
were elected, Ferdinand declared war against Austria 

constitu-
tion of
!848t

(April 7th, 1848). After considerable delay a Neapolitan army 
under General Pepe marched towards Lombardy in May, while 
the fleet sailed for Venice. But a dispute between the king and 
the parliament concerning the form of the royal oath having 
arisen, a group of demagogues with criminal folly provoked 
disturbances and erected barricades (May 14th). The king 
refused to open parliament unless the barricades were removed, 
and while the moderate elements attempted to bring about 
conciliation, the ministry acted with great weakness. A few 
shots were fired — it is not known who fired first — on 
of May. the 15th, the Swiss regiments stormed the barricades 

and street fighting lasted all day. By the evening the 
Swiss and the royalists were masters of the situation. A new 
ministry under Prince Cariati was appointed. Parliament was 
dissolved, the National Guard disbanded and the army recalled 
from the Po. Fresh elections were held and the new parliament 
met on the 15th of July, but it had the king, the army and the 
mob against it, and anti-constitutionalist demonstrations became 
frequent. After a brief session it was prorogued to the 1st of 
February 1849, and when it met on that date a deadlock between 
king and parliament occurred. The Austrian victories in Lom- 
bardy had strengthened the court party, or Camarilla as it was 
called, and on the 13th of March the assembly was again dissolved, 
and never summoned again. The king was at Gaeta, whither 
the grand-duke of Tuscany and Pius IX. had also repaired to 
escape from their rebellious subjects, and the city became the 
headquarters of Italian reaction. 

In Sicily the revolutionists were purely insular in their aspira- 
tions and bitterly hostile to the Neapolitans, and the attempts 
at conciliation, although favoured by Lord Minto, 
failed, for Naples wanted one constitution and one 
parliament, whereas Sicily wanted two, with only the king in 
common. The Sicilian assembly met in March 1848, and Settimo 
in his inaugural speech declared that the Bourbon dynasty had 
ceased to reign, that the throne was vacant and that Sicily united 
her destinies to those of Italy. Settimo was elected president of 
the government, but the administration was lacking in states- 
manship, the treasury was empty, and nothing was done to raise 
an army. After the Austrian victories King Ferdinand sent a 
Neapolitan army of 20,000 men under Filangieri to subjugate 
the island. The troops landed at Messina, of which the citadel 
had been held by the royalists throughout, and after three days' 
desperate fighting the city itself was captured and sacked. 
The British and French admirals imposed a truce with a view to 
conciliation, and the king offered the Sicilians the Neapolitan 
constitution and a separate parliament, which they refused. 
Sicilian troops were now levied throughout the island and the 
chief command given to the Pole Mieroslawski, but it was too 
late. Filangieri marched forward taking town after town, and 
committing many atrocities. In April he reached Palermo while 
the fleet appeared in the bay; tumults having broken out within 
the city, the government surrendered on terms which granted 
amnesty for all except Settimo and forty-two others. 

For a few months after the dissolution of the Neapolitan 
parliament the government abstained from persecution, but 
with the crushing of the Sicilian revolution its hands 
Neapolitan were ^ ree J an ^ when the commission on the affair of 
prisons. the 15th of May had completed its labours the state 
trials and arrests began. The arrest of S. Fauci tano 
for a demonstration at Gaeta led to the discovery of the Unild 
Italiana society, whose object was to free Italy from domestic 
tyranny and foreign domination. Thousands of respectable 
citizens were thrown into prison, such as L. Settembrini, Carlo 
Poerio and Silvio Spaventa. The trials were conducted with the 
most scandalous contempt of justice, and moral and physical 
torture was applied to extort confessions. The abominable con- 

	Siclty. 

ditions of the prisons in which the best men of the kingdom were 
immured, linked to the vilest common criminals, was made 
known to the world by the famous letters of W. E. Gladstone, 
which branded the Bourbon regime as " the negation of God 
erected into a system of government." The merest suspicion of 
unorthodox opinions, the possession of foreign newspapers, the 
wearing of a beard or an anonymous denunciation, sufficed for 
the arrest and condemnation of a man to years of imprisonment, 
while the altendibili, or persons under police surveillance liable 
to imprisonment without trial at any moment, numbered 50,000. 
The remonstrances of Great Britain and France met with no 
success. Ferdinand strongly resented foreign interference, and 
even rejected the Austrian proposal for a league of the Italian 
despots for mutual defence against external attacks and internal 
disorder. In 1856 his life was unsuccessfully attempted by a 
soldier, and the same year Baron Bentivegna organized a revolt 
near Palermo, which was quickly suppressed. In 1857 Carlo 
Pisacane, an ex-Neapolitan officer who had taken part t 

in the defence of Rome, fitted out an expedition, with a ttcmpt * 
Mazzini's approval, from Genoa, and landed at Sapri 
in Calabria, where he hoped to raise the flag of revolution; but 
the local police assisted by the peasantry attacked the band, 
killing many, including Pisacane himself, and capturing most of 
the rest. The following year, at the instance of Great Britain 
and France, Ferdinand commuted the sentences of some of the 
political prisoners to exile. (See Ferdinand II., king of the Two 
Sicilies). 

In May 1859 Ferdinand died, and was succeeded by his son, 
Francis II., who came to the throne just as the Franco-Sardinian 
victories in Lombardy were sounding the death-knell FrancIsII 
of Austrian predominance and domestic despotism in 
Italy (see Italy: History). But although there was much 
activity and plotting among the Liberals, there was as yet no 
revolution. Victor Emmanuel, king of Sardinia, wrote to the 
new king proposing an alliance for the division of Italy, but 
Francis refused. In June part of the Swiss Guard mutinied 
because the Bernese government not having renewed the conven- 
tion with Naples the troops were deprived of their cantonal flag. 
The mutinous regiments, however, were surrounded by loyal 
troops and shot down; and this affair resulted in the disbanding 
of the whole force — the last support of the autocracy. Political 
amnesties were now decreed, and in September 1859 Filangieri was 
made prime minister. The latter favoured the Sardinian alliance 
and the.granting of the constitution, and so did the king's uncle, 
Leopold, count of Syracuse. But Francis rejected both proposals 
and Filangieri resigned and was succeeded by A. Statella. In 
April i860 Victor Emmanuel again proposed an alliance whereby 
Naples, in return for help in expelling the Austrians from 
Venetia, was to receive the Marche, while Sardinia would annex 
all the rest of Italy except Rome. But Francis again refused, 
and in fact was negotiating with Austria and the pope for a 
simultaneous invasion of Modena, Lombardy and Romagna. 

In the meantime, however, events in Sicily were reaching a 
crisis destined to subvert the Bourbon dynasty. The Sicilians, 
unlike the Neapolitans, were thoroughly alienated from 
the Bourbons, whom they detested, and after the ^thf' 
peace of Villafranca (July 1859) Mazzini's emissaries, Thousand. 
F. Crispi and R. Pilo, had been trying to organize a 
rising in favour of Italian unity; and although they merely 
succeeded in raising a few squadre, or armed bands, in the 
mountainous districts, they persuaded Garibaldi (q.v.), without 
the magic of whose personal prestige they knew nothing im- 
portant could be achieved, that the revolution which he knew 
to be imminent had broken out. The authorities at Palermo, 
learning of a projected rising, attacked the convent of La Gangia, 
the headquarters of the rebels, and killed most of the inmates; 
but in the meanwhile Garibaldi, whose hesitation had been 
overcome, embarked on the 5th of May i860, at Quarto, near 
Genoa, with 1000 picked followers on board two steamers, and 
sailed for Sicily. On the nth the expedition reached Marsala 
and landed without opposition. Garibaldi was somewhat coldly 
received by the astonished population; but he set forth at once for 
Salemi, whence he issued a proclamation assuming the dictator- 
ship of Sicily in the name of Victor Emmanuel, with Crispi as 
secretary of state. He continued his march towards Palermo, 
where the bulk of the 30,000 Bourbon troops were concentrated, 
gathering numerous followers on the way. On the 15th he 
attacked and defeated 3000 of the enemy under General Landi 
at Calatafimi; the news of this brilliant victory revived the 
revolutionary agitation throughout the island, and Garibaldi 
was joined by Pilo and his bands. By a cleverly devised ruse he 
avoided General Colonna's force, which expected him on the 
„ . Monreale road, and entering Palermo from Misilmeri 

received an enthusiastic welcome. The Bourbonists, 
although they bombarded the city from the citadel and the 
warships in the harbour, gradually lost ground, and after three 
days' street fighting their commander, General Lanza, not 
knowing that the Garibaldians had scarcely a cartridge left, 
asked for arid obtained a twenty-four hours' armistice (May 30th). 
Garibaldi went on board the British flagship to confer with the 
Neapolitan generals Letizia and Chretien; Letizia's proposal 
that the municipality should make a humble petition to the 
king was indignantly rejected by Garibaldi, who merely agreed 
to the extension of the armistice until next day. Then he 
informed the citizens by means of a proclamation of what he had 
done, and declared that, knowing them to be ready to die in the 
ruins of their city, he would renew hostilities on the expiration 
of the armistice. Although unarmed, the people rallied to him 
as one man, and Lanza became so alarmed that he asked for 
an unconditional extension of the armistice, which "Garibaldi 
granted. The dictator now had time to collect ammunition, and 
the Neapolitan government having given Lanza full powers to 
treat with him, 15,000 Bourbon troops embarked for Naples on 
the 7th of June, leaving the revolutionists masters of the situation. 
The Sardinian Admiral Persano's salute of nineteen guns on the 
occasion of Garibaldi's official call constituted a practical recogni- 
tion of his dictatorship by the Sardinian (Piedmontese) govern- 
ment. In July further reinforcements of volunteers under Cosenz 
and Medici, assisted by Cavour, arrived at Palermo with a good 
supply of arms furnished by subscription in northern Italy. Gari- 
baldi's forces were now raised to 12,000 men, besides the Sicilian 
squadre. Cavour's attempt to bring about the annexation of 
Sicily to Sardinia failed, for Garibaldi wished to use the island as 
a basis for an invasion of the mainland. Most of the island had 
now been evacuated by the Bourbonists, but Messina and a few 
other points still held out, and when the Garibaldians advanced 
eastward they encountered a force of 4000 of the enemy under 
Colonel Bosco at Milazzo; on the 20th of July a desperate 
battle took place resulting in a hard-won Garibaldian victory. 
The Neapolitan government then decided on the evacuation of 
(the whole of Sicily except the citadel of Messina, which did not 
surrender until the following year. 
The news of Garibaldi's astonishing successes entirely changed 
the situation in the capital, and on the 25th of June i860 the 
The king, after consulting the ministers and the royal 
Neapolitan family, granted a constitution, and appointed A. 
constitu- Spinelli prime minister. Disorders having taken 
» place between Liberals and reactionaries, Liberio 
Romano was made minister of police in the place of Aiossa. 
Sicily being lost, the king directed all his efforts to save Naples; 
he appealed to Great Britain and France to prevent Garibaldi 
(from crossing the Straits of Messina, and only just failed (for this 
episode see under Lacaita, G.). Victor Emmanuel himself 
wrote to Garibaldi urging him to abstain from an attack on 
Naples, but Garibaldi refused to obey, and on the 19th of August 
he crossed with 4500 men and took Reggio by storm. He was 
soon joined by the rest of his troops, 15,000 in all, and although 
the Neapolitan government had 30,000 men in Calabria alone, the 
army collapsed before Garibaldi's advance, and the 
on'tht^ P eo P le rose * n ms favour almost everywhere. Francis 
mainland, offered Garihaldi a large sum of money if he would 
abstain from advancing farther, and 50,000 men to 
fight the Austrians and the pope; but it was too late, and on the 
6th of September the king and queen sailed for Gaeta. The 
40,000 Bourbon troops between Salerno and Avellino fell back 
panic-stricken, and on the 7th Garibaldi entered Naples alone, 
although the city was still full of soldiers, and was received with 
delirious enthusiasm. On the nth a part of the royalists 
capitulated and the rest retired on Capua. Cavour now decided 
that Sardinia must take part in the liberation of southern Italy, 
for he feared that Garibaldi's followers might induce him to 
proclaim the republic and attack Rome, which would have 
provoked French hostility; consequently a Piedmontese army 
occupied the Marche and Umbria, and entered Neapolitan 
territory with Victor Emmanuel at its head. On the 1st and 2nd 
of October i860 a battle was fought on the Volturno victor 
between 20,000 Garibaldians, many of them raw Emmanuel 
levies, and 35,000 Bourbon troops, and although at *" rf 
first a Garibaldian division under Tiirr was repulsed, aaHbatdL 
Garibaldi himself arrived in time to turn defeat into victory. 
On the 26th he met Victor Emmanuel at Teano and hailed him 
king of Italy, and subsequently handed over his conquests to 
him. On the 3rd of November a plebiscite was taken, which 
resulted in an overwhelming majority in favour of union with 
Sardinia under Victor Emmanuel. Garibaldi departed for his 
island home at Caprera, while L.C. Farini was appointed viceroy 
of Naples and M. Cordero viceroy of Sicily. The last remnant of 
the Bourbon army was concentrated at Gaeta, the siege of which 
was begun by Cialdinion the 5th of November; on the 
10th of January 1861 the French fleet, which Napoleon G& \^ 
III. had sent to Gaeta to delay the inevitable fall of the 
dynasty, was withdrawn at the instance of Great Britain; and 
although the garrison fought bravely and the king and queen 
showed considerable courage, the fortress surrendered on the 
13th of February and the royal family departed by sea. (See 
Francis II., King of the Two Sicilies.) The citadel of Messina 
capitulated a month later, and Civitella del Tronto on the 21st 
of March. On the 18th of February the first Italian parliament 
met at Turin and proclaimed Victor Emmanuel king of Italy. 
Thus Naples and Sicily ceased to be a separate political entity 
and were absorbed into the united Italian kingdom. 

Bibliography. — General works: F. Carta, Storia del regno delle 
Due Sicilie (Naples, 1848); F. Pagano, I storia del regno d% Napoli 
(Naples and Palermo, 1832, &c.) ; J. Albini, De gestis regum NeapoliL 
ab Aragonia (Naples, 1588); several chapters in the Storia politica 
d f Italia (Milan, 1875-1882); F. Lanzani, Storia dei comuni Italiani 
. . . fino al 1313 ; C. Cipolla, Storia delle signorie Italiane dal 1313 
al 1530; Cosci, V Italia durante le preponderant straniere t 1530- 
1789; A. Franchetti, Storia a" Italia dal 1789 al 1799; G. de Castro, 
Storia d % Italia dal 1799 al 1814; F. Bertolini, Storia d' Italia dal 
18 1 4 al 1878. For the more recent history P. Collet ta*s Storia del 
reame di Napoli (Florence, 1848) will be found very useful, though 
not without bias, and G. Pepe's Memorie (Paris, 1847) are also im- 
portant, both authors having played an important part in the events 
of 1809-1815 and 1820-1821; N. Nisco, Gli ultimi 36 anni del 
reame di Napoli (Naples, 1889). On the subject of the revolution 
of 1799 and the Nelson episode there is quite a library. The docu- 
ments are mostly to be found in Nelson and the Neapolitan Jacobins 
(Navy Records Society, London, 1903), edited by H. C. Gutteridge, 
with an introduction, where Nelson's action is defended, and a 
bibliography. A. T. Mahan in his Life of Nelson (2nd ed., London, 
1899), and in the English Historical Review for July 1899 and October 
1900, takes the same view; for the other side see C. Giglioli, Naples 
in 1799 (London, 1903), which is impartial and well written; F. P. 
Badham, Nelson at Naples (London, 1900); P. Villari, "Nelson, 
Caracciolo e la Repubblica Napolitana " (Nuova Antologia, February 
16, 1899); A. Maresca, Gli awenimenti di Napoli dal 13 giugno al 
12 luglto, 1799 (Naples, 1900); B. Croce, Studii storici sulla rivo- 
luzione Napoletana del 1799 (Rome, 1897); Freiherr von Helfert has 
attempted the impossible task of whitewashing Queen Mary Caroline 
in his Konigin Karolina von Neapel und Sicilien (Vienna, 1878) and 
Maria Karolina von Osterreich (Vienna, 1884), while in his Fabrizio 
Ruffo (Italian edition, Florence, 1885) he gives a rose-coloured 
portrait of that prelate and his brigand bands; see also H. Huffer's 
Die neapolitanische Republik des Jahres 1799 (Leipzig, 1884). For a. 
general account of the French period see C. Auriol, La France , 
VAngleterre, et Naples (Paris, 1906), and R. M. Johnston, The Napole- 
onic Empire in South Italy (London, 1904.), both based on documents. 
For the latest period see N. Nisco, Git ultimi 36 anni del reame di 
Napoli (Naples, 1889) ; H. R. Whitehouse, The Collapse of the Kingdom 
of Naples (New York, 1899), and R. de Cesare, La Fine d* un regno 
(Citta di Castello,'i90o), which contains much information but is not 
always accurate. For the British occupation of Sicily see G. Bianco, 
La Sicilia durante V occupazione Inglese (Palermo, 1902); and for 
Sicily from 1830 to 1861, Francesco Guardione's // Dominio dei 
Borboni in Sialic (Turin, 1908) will be found useful. The best 
account of Garibaldi's expedition is G. Trevelyan's Garibaldi and the 
Thousand (London, 1909). (L. V.*) 


NAPOLEON I. (1769-1821), Emperor of the French. Napoleon 
Bonaparte (or Buonaparte, as he almost always spelt the name 
•down the year 1796) was born at Ajaccio in Corsica on the 
15th of August 1769. The date of his birth has been disputed, 
and certain curious facts have been cited in proof of the assertion 
that he was born on the 7th of January 1768, and that his brother 
Joseph, who passed as the eldest surviving son, was in reality 
his junior. Recent research has, however, explained how it came 
about that a son born on the earb'er date received the name 
Nabulione (Napoleon). The father, Carlo Maria da Buonaparte 
(Charles Marie de Bonaparte), had resolved to call his three first 
sons by the names given by his great-grandfather to his sons, 
namely Joseph, Napoleon and Lucien. This was done; but on 
the death of the eldest (Joseph) the child first baptized Nabulion 
received the name Joseph; while the third son (the second 
surviving son) was called Napoleon. The baptismal register of 
Ajaccio leaves no doubt as to the date of his birth as given above. 
For his parents and family see Bonaparte. The father's 
literary tastes, general inquisitiveness, and powers of intrigue 
reappeared in Napoleon, who, however, derived from his mother 
Letizia (a descendant of the Ramolino and Pietra Santa families) 
the force of will, the power of forming a quick decision and of 
maintaining it against all odds, which made him so terrible an 
opponent both in war and in diplomacy. The sterner strain in 
the mother's nature may be traced to intermarriage with the 
families of the wild interior of Corsica, where the vendetta was 
the unwritten but omnipotent law of the land. The Bonapartes, 
on the other hand?, had long concerned themselves with legal 
affairs at Ajaccio or in the coast towns of the island. They 
traced their descent to ancestors who had achieved distinction 
in the political life of medieval Florence and Sarzana; Francesco 
Buonaparte of Sarzana migrated to Corsica early in the 16th 
century. What is equally noteworthy, as explaining the 
characteristics of Napoleon, is that his descent was on both 
sides distinctly patrician. He once remarked that the house of 
Bonaparte dated from the coup d'Ual of Brum aire (November 
1799); but it is certain the de Buonapartes had received the 
title of nobility from the senate of the republic of Genoa which, 
during the 18th century, claimed to exercise sovereignty over 
Corsica. 

It was in the midst of the strifes resulting from those claims 
that Napoleon Bonaparte saw the light in 1 769. His compatriots 
had already freed themselves from the yoke of Genoa, thanks to 
Pasquale Paoli; but in 1764 that republic appealed to Louis XV. 
of France for aid, and in 1768 a bargain was struck by which the 
French government succeeded to the nearly bankrupt sovereignty 
of Genoa. In the campaigns of 1 768-69 the French gradually 
overcame the fierce resistance of the islanders; and Paoli, after 
sustaining a defeat at Ponte-Novo (9th of May 1769), fled to the 
mainland, and ultimately to England. Napoleon's father at first 
sided with Paoh", but after the disaster of Ponte-Novo he went 
over to the conquerors, and thereafter solicited places for himself 
and for his sons with a skill and persistence which led to a close 
union between the Bonapartes and France. From the French 
governor of Corsica, the comte de Marbeuf, he procured many 
favours, among them being the nomination of the young Napoleon 
to the military school at Brienne in the east of France. 

Already the boy had avowed his resolve to be a soldier. In 
the large playroom of the house at Ajaccio, while the others 
amused themselves with ordinary games, Napoleon delighted 
most in beating a drum and wielding a sword. His elder brother, 
Joseph, a mild and dreamy boy, had to give way before him; 
and it was a perception of this difference of temperament which 
decided the father to send Joseph into the church and Napoleon 
into the army. Seeing that the younger boy was almost entirely 
ignorant of French, he took him with Joseph to the college at 
Autun at the close of the year 1 778. After spending four months 
at Autun, Napoleon entered the school at Brienne in May 1779. 

The pupils at Brienne, far from receiving a military education, 
were grounded in ordinary subjects, and in no very efficient 
manner, by brethren of the order, or society, of Minims. The 
moral tone of the school was low; and Napoleon afterwards 
spoke with contempt of the training of the " monks " and the 
manner of life of the scholars. Perhaps his impressions were too 
gloomy; his whole enthusiasm had been for the Corsicans, who 
still maintained an unequal struggle against the French; he 
deeply resented his father's espousal of the French cause; and 
dislike of the conquerors of his native island made him morose 
and solitary. Apart from decided signs of proficiency in mathe- 
matics, he showed no special ability. Languages he disliked, but 
he spent much of his spare time in reading history, especially 
Plutarch. The firmness of character which he displayed caused 
him to be recommended in 1782 for the navy by one of the 
inspectors of the school; but a new inspector, who was appointed 
in 1783, frustrated this plan. In October 1784 Bonaparte and 
three other Briennois were authorized, by a letter signed by 
Louis XVI., to proceed as gentlemen cadets to the military school 
at Paris. There the education was more thorough, and the 
discipline stricter, than at Brienne. Napoleon applied himself 
with more zest to his studies, in the hope of speedily qualifying 
himself for the artillery. In this he succeeded. As the result of 
an examination conducted in September 1785 by Laplace, Bona- 
parte was included among those who entered the army without 
going through an intermediate stage. 

At the end of] October 1785 he closed a scholastic career which 
had beefKcreditable but not brilliant. He now entered the 
artillery regiment, La Fere, quartered at Valence, and went 
through all the duties imposed on privates, and thereafter those 
of a corporal and a sergeant. Not until January 1786 did he 
actually serve as junior lieutenant. A time of furlough in Corsica 
from September 1786 to September 1787 served to strengthen his 
affection for his mother, and for the island which he still hoped 
to free from the French yoke. The father having died of cancer 
at Montpellier in 1785, Napoleon felt added responsibilites, which 
he zealously discharged. In order to push forward a claim which 
Letizia urged on the French government, he proceeded to Paris 
in September 1787, and toyed for a time with the pleasures of the 
Palais Royal, but failed to make good the family claim. After 
gaining a further extension of leave of absence from his regiment 
he returned to Ajaccio and spent six months more in the midst 
of family and political affairs. Rejoining his regiment, then in 
the garrison at Auxonne, after a furlough of twenty-one months, 
the young officer went through a time of much privation, 
brightened only by the study of history and cognate subjects. 
Many of the notes and essays written by him at Auxonne bear 
witness to his indomitable resolve to master all the details of his 
profession and the chief facts relating to peoples who had struggled 
successfully to achieve their liberation. Enthusiasm for Corsica 
was a leading motive prompting him to this prolonged exertion. 
His notes on English history (down to the time of the revolution 
of 1688) were especially detailed. Of Cromwell he wrote: 
" Courageous, clever, deceitful, dissimulating, his early principles 
of lofty republicanism yielded to the devouring flames of his 
ambition; and, having tasted the sweets of power, he aspired to 
the pleasure of reigning alone." At Auxonne, as previously at 
Valence, Napoleon commanded a small detachment of troops 
sent to put down disturbances in neighbouring towns, and carried 
out his orders unflinchingly. To this period belongs his first 
crude literary effort, a polemic against a Genevese pastor who 
had criticized Rousseau. 

In the latter part of his stay at Auxonne (June 1788- 
September 1 789) occurred the first events of the Revolution which 
was destined to mould anew his ideas and his career. But his 
preoccupation about Corsica, the privations to which he and his 
family were then exposed, and his bad health, left him little 
energy to expend on purely French affairs. He read much of the 
pamphlet literature then flooding the country, but he still pre- 
ferred the more general studies in history and literature, Plutarch, 
Caesar, Corneille, Voltaire and Rousseau being his favourite 
authors. The plea of the last named on behalf of Corsica served 
to enlist the sympathy of Napoleon in his wider speculations, 
and so helped to bring about that mental transformation which 
merged Buonaparte the Corsican in Bonaparte the Jacobin 
and Napoleon the First Consul and Emperor. 

Family influences also played their part in this transformation. 
On proceeding to Ajaccio in September 1789 for another furlough, 
he found his brother Joseph enthusiastic in the democratic 
cause and acting as secretary of the local political club. Napoleon 
seconded his efforts, and soon they had the help of the third 
brother, Lucien, who proved to be most eager and eloquent. 
Thanks to the exertions of Saliceti, one of the two deputies sent 
by the tiers etat of Corsica to the National Assembly of France, 
that body, on the 30th of November 1789, declared the island to 
be an integral part of the kingdom with right to participate in 
all the reforms then being decreed. This event decided Napoleon 
to give his adhesion to the French or democratic party; and 
when, in July 1790, Paoli returned from exile in England (receiv- 
ing on his way the honours of the sitting by the National 
Assembly) the claims of nationality and democracy seemed to 
be identical, though the future course of events disappointed 
these hopes. Shortly before returning to his regiment in the 
early weeks of 1791 he indited a letter inveighing in violent 
terms against Matteo Buttafuoco, deputy for the Corsican 
noblesse in the National Assembly of France, as having betrayed 
the cause of insular liberty in 1768 and as plotting against it 
again. 

The experiences of Bonaparte at Auxonne during his second 
stay in garrison were again depressing. With him in his poorly 
furnished lodgings was Louis Bonaparte, the fourth surviving 
son, whom he carefully educated and for whom he predicted a 
brilliant future. For the present their means were very scanty, 
and, as the ardent royalism of his brother officers limited his 
social circle, he plunged into work with the same ardour as before, 
frequently studying fourteen or fifteen hours a day. Then it 
was, or perhaps at a slightly later date, that he became interested 
in the relations subsisting between political science and war. From 
U Esprit des lots of Montesquieu he learnt suggestive thoughts 
like the following: " L'objet de* la guerre, e'est la victoire; 
celui de la victoire, la conquete; celui de la conquete, 1 'occupa- 
tion." Machiavelli taught him the need of speed, decision 
and unity of command, in war. From the TraitS de tactique 
(1772) of Guibert he caught a glimpse of the power which a 
patriotic and fully armed nation might gain amidst the feeble 
and ill-organized governments of that age. 

External events served to unite him more closely to France. 
The reorganization of the artillery, which took place in the spring 
of 1 791, brought Bonaparte to the rank of lieutenant in the 
regiment of Grenoble, then stationed at Valence. He left the 
regiment La Fere with regret on the 14th of June 1791; but at 
Valence he renewed former friendships and plunged into politics 
with greater ardour. Most of his colleagues refused to take 
the oath of obedience to the Constituent Assembly, after the 
attempted escape of Louis XVI. to the eastern frontier at mid- 
summer. Bonaparte took the oath on the 4th of July, but said 
later that the Assembly ought to have banished the king and 
proclaimed a regency for Louis XVII. In general, however, 
his views at that time were republican; he belonged to the club 
of Friends of the Constitution at Valence, spoke there with much 
acceptance, and was appointed librarian to the club. 

At Valence also he wrote an essay for a prize instituted by 
his friend and literary adviser, Raynal, at the academy of 
Lyons. The subject was " What truths and sentiments is it 
most important to inculcate to men for their happiness? " 
Bonaparte's essay bore signs of study of Rousseau and of the 
cult of Lycurgus which was coming into vogue. The Spartans 
were happy, said the writer, because they had plenty of good, 
suitable clothing and lodging, robust women, and were able to 
meet their requirements both physical and mental. Men should 
live according to the laws and dictates of nature, not forgetting 
the claims of reason and sentiment. The latter part of the 
essay is remarkable for its fervid presentment of the charms of 
scenery and for vigorous declamation against the follies and 
crimes of ambitious men. The judges at Lyons placed "it 
fifteenth in order of merit among the sixteen essays sent in. 

Thanks to the friendly intervention of the martchal du camp, 
baron Duteil, Bonaparte once more gained leave of absence 
for three months and reached Corsica in September 1 79 1 . Opinion 
there was in an excited state, the priests and the populace being 
inflamed against the anti-clerical decrees of the National Assembly 
of France. Paoli did little to help on the Bonapartes; and 
the advancement of Joseph Bonaparte was slow. Napoleon's 
admiration for the dictator also began to cool, and events began 
to point to a rupture. The death of Archdeacon Lucien Bona- 
parte, the recognized head of the family, having placed property 
at the disposal of the sons, they bought a house, which became 
the rendezvous of the democrats and of a band of volunteers 
whom they raised. In the intrigues for the command of this 
body Napoleon had his rival, Morati, carried off by force — 
his first coup d'etat. The incident led to a feud with the supporters 
of Morati, among whom was Pozzo di Borgo (destined to be his 
life-long enemy), and opened a breach between the Bonapartes 
and Paoli. Bonaparte's imperious nature also showed itself 
in family matters, which he ruled with a high hand. No one, 
said his younger brother Lucien, liked to thwart him. 

Further discords naturally arose between so masterful a 
lieutenant as Bonaparte and so autocratic a chief as Paoli. 
The beginnings of this rupture, as well as a sharp affray between 
his volunteers and the townsfolk of Ajaccio, may have quickened 
Bonaparte's resolve to return to France in May 1792, but there 
were also personal and family reasons for this step. Having 
again exceeded his time of furlough, he was liable to the severe 
penalties attaching to a deserter and an imigrS; but he saw 
that the circumstances of the time would help to enforce the 
appeal for reinstatement which he resolved to make at Paris. 
His surmise was correct. The Girondin ministry then in power 
had brought Louis XVI. to declare war against Austria (20th 
of April 1792) and against Sardinia (15th of May 1792). The 
lack of trained officers was such as to render the employment 
and advancement of Bonaparte probable in the near future, 
and on the 30th of August, Servan, the minister for war, issued 
an order appointing him to be captain in his regiment and to 
receive arrears of pay. During this stay at Paris he witnessed 
some of the great "days" of the Revolution; but the sad 
plight of his sister, Marianna Elisa, on the dissolution of the 
convent of St Cyr, where she was being educated, compelled 
him to escort her back to Corsica shortly after the September 
massacres. 

His last time of furlough in Corsica is remarkable for the 
failure of the expedition in which he and his volunteers took 
part, against la Maddalena, a small island off the coast of 
Sardinia.- The breach between Paoli and the Bonapartes now 
rapidly widened, the latter having now definitely espoused the 
cause of the French republic, while Paoli, especially after the 
execution of Louis XVI., repudiated all thought of political 
connexion with the regicides. Ultimately the Bonapartes had 
to flee from Corsica (nth of June 1793), an event which clinched 
Napoleon's decision to identify his fortunes with those of the 
French republic. His ardent democratic opinions rendered 
the change natural when Paoli and his compatriots declared for 
an alliance with England. 

The arrival of the Bonapartes at Toulon coincided with a time 
of acute crisis in the fortunes of the republic. Having declared 
war on England and Holland (1st of February 1793), and against 
Spain (9th of March), France was soon girdled by foes; and the 
forces of the first coalition invaded her territory at several points. 
At first the utmost efforts of the republic failed to avert disaster; 
for the intensely royalist district of la Vendee, together with 
most of Brittany, burst into revolt, and several of the northern, 
central and southern departments rose against the Jacobin rule. 
The struggle which the constitutionalists and royalists of 
Marseilles made against the central government furnished 
Bonaparte with an occasion for writing his first important 
political pamphlet, entitled " Le Souper de BeaucaireP It 
purports to be a conversation at the little town of Beaucaire 
between a soldier (obviously the writer himself) and three men, 
citizens of Marseilles, Nimes and Montpellier, who oppose the 
Jacobinical government and hope for victory over its forces. 
The officer points out the folly of such a course, and the 
certainty that the republic, whose troops had triumphed over 
those of Prussia and Austria, will speedily disperse the untrained 
levies of Provence. The pamphlet closes with a passionate 
plea for national unity. 

He was now to further the cause of the republic one and 
indivisible in the sphere of action. The royalists of Toulon had 
admitted British and Spanish forces to share in the defence of 
that stronghold (29th of August 1793). The blow to the re- 
publican cause was most serious: for from Toulon as a centre 
the royalists threatened to raise a general revolt throughout the 
south of France, and Pitt cherished hopes of dealing a death-blow 
to the Jacobins in that quarter. But fortune now brought 
Bonaparte to bb'ght those hopes. Told off to serve in the army 
of Nice, he was detained by a special order of the commissioners 
of the Convention, Saliceti and Gasparin, who, hearing of the 
severe wound sustained by Dommartin, the commander of the 
artillery of the republican forces before Toulon, ordered Bona- 
parte to take his place. He arrived at the republican head- 
quarters, then at Ollioules on the north-west of Toulon, on the 
16th of September; and it .is noteworthy that as early as Sep- 
tember 10th the commissioners had seen the need of attacking 
the allied fleet and had paid some attention to the headland 
behind l'figuillette, which commanded both the outer and the 
inner harbour. But there is no doubt that Bonaparte brought 
to bear on the execution of this as yet vague and general proposal 
powers of concentration and organization which ensured its 
success. In particular he soon put the artillery of the besiegers 
in good order. Carteaux, an ex-artist, at first held the supreme 
command, but was superseded on the 23rd of October. Doppet, 
the next commander, was little better fitted for the task; but 
his successor, Dugommier, was a brave and experienced soldier 
who appreciated the merits of Bonaparte. Under their direction 
steady advance was made on the side which Bonaparte saw to 
be all important; a sortie of part of the British, Spanish and 
Neapolitan forces on the 30th of November was beaten back 
with loss, General O'Hara, their commander, being severely 
wounded and taken prisoner. On the night of the i6th-i7th 
December, Dugommier, Bonaparte, Victor and Muiron headed 
the storming column which forced its way into the chief battery 
thrown up by the besieged on the height behind Pfiguillette; 
and on the next day Hood and Langara set sail, leaving the 
royalists to the vengeance of the Jacobins. General du Teil, 
the younger, who took part in the siege, thus commented on 
Bonaparte's services: " I have no words in which to describe 
the merit of Bonaparte: much science, as much intelligence and 
too much bravery. ... It is for you, Ministers, to consecrate 
him to the glory of the republic." At Toulon Bonaparte made 
the acquaintance of men who were to win renown under his 
leadership — Desaix, Junot, Marmont, Muiron, Suchet and 
Victor. 

It is often assumed that the fortunes of Bonaparte were made 
at Toulon. This is an exaggeration. True, on the 22nd of 
December 1793 he was made general of brigade for his services; 
and in February 1794 he gained the command of the artillery 
in the French army about to invade Italy; but during the 
preliminary work of fortification along the coast he was placed 
under arrest for a time owing to his reconstruction of an old fort 
at Marseilles which had been destroyed during the Revolution. 
He was soon released owing to the interposition of the younger 
Robespierre and of Saliceti. Thereafter he resided successively 
at Toulon, St Tropez and Antibes, doing useful work in fortifying 
the coast and using his spare time in arduous study of the science 
of war. This he had already begun at Auxonne under the in- 
spiring guidance of the baron du Teil. General du Teil, younger 
brother of the baron, had recently published a work, V Usage de 
Vartillerie nouvelle; and it is now known that Bonaparte derived 
from this work and from those of Guibert and Bourcet that lead- 
ing principle, concentration of effort against one point of the 
enemy's line, which he had advocated at Toulon and which he 
everywhere put in force in his campaigns. 

On or about the 20th of March 1794 he arrived at the head- 
quarters of the army of Italy. At Colmars, on the 21st of May 
1794, he drew up the first draft of his Italian plan of campaign 
for severing the Piedmontese from their Austrian allies and for 
driving the latter out of their Italian provinces. A secret mission 
to Genoa enabled him to inspect the pass north of Savona, and 
the knowledge of the peculiarities of that district certainly helped 
him in maturing his plan for an invasion of Italy, which he put 
into execution in 1796. For the present he experienced a sharp 
rebuff of fortune, which he met with his usual fortitude. He 
was suddenly placed under arrest owing to intrigues or suspicions 
of the men raised to power by the coup d J €tat of Thermidoro-10 
(July 27-28) 1794. The commissioners sent by the Convention, 
Alhitte, Laporte and Saliceti, suspected him of having divulged 
the plan of campaign, and on the 6th of August ordered his 
arrest as being the " maker of plans " for the younger Robes- 
pierre. On a slighter accusation than this many had perished; 
but an examination into the details of the mission of Bonaparte 
to Genoa and the new instructions which arrived from Carnot, 
availed to procure his release on the 20th of August. It came in 
time to enable him to share in the operations of the French army 
against the Austrians that led to the battle of Dego, north of 
Savona (21st of September), a success largely due to his skilful 
combinations. But the decline in the energies of the central 
government at Paris and the appointment of Scherer as com- 
mander-in-chief of the army of Italy frustrated the plans of a 
vigorous offensive which Bonaparte continued to develop and 
advocate. 

Meanwhile he took part in' an expedition fitted out in the 
southern ports to drive the English from Corsica. It was a 
complete failure, and for a time his prospects were overclouded. 
In the spring of 1795 ne received an order from Paris to proceed 
to la Vendee in command of an infantry brigade. He declined 
on the score of ill-health, but set out for Paris in May, along with 
Marmont, Junot and Louis Bonaparte. At the capital he found 
affairs quickly falling back into the old ways of pleasure and 
luxury. " People," he wrote, " remember the Terror only as a 
dream." That he still pursued his studies of military affairs is 
shown by the compilation of further plans for the Italian cam- 
paign. The news of the ratification of peace with Spain brought 
at once the thought that an offensive plan of campaign in Pied- 
mont was thenceforth inevitable. Probably these plans gained 
for him an appointment (20th of August) in the topographical 
bureau of the committee of Public Safety. But, cither from 
weariness of the life at Paris, or from disgust at clerical work, 
he sought permission to go to Turkey in order to reorganize the 
artillery of the Sultan. But an inspection of his antecedents 
showed the many irregularities of his conduct as officer and led 
to his name being erased from the list of general officers (Sep- 
tember 15th). 

Again the difficulty of the republic was to be his opportunity. 
The action of the Convention in perpetuating its influence by 
the imposition of two-thirds of its members on the next popularly 
elected councils, aroused a storm of indignation in Paris, where 
the " moderate " and royalist reaction was already making 
headway. The result was the massing of some 30,000 National 
Guards to coerce the Convention. Confronted by this serious 
danger, the Convention entrusted its defence to B arras, who 
appointed the young officer to be one of the generals assisting 
him. The vigour and tactical skill of Bonaparte contributed 
very largely to the success of the troops of the Convention over 
the Parisian malcontents on the famous day of 13 Vendemiaire 
(October 5th, 1795), when the defenders of the Convention, 
sweeping the quays and streets near the Tuillcries by artillery 
and musketry, soon paralysed the movement at its headquarters, 
the church of St Roch. The results of this day were out of all 
proportion to the comparatively small number of casualties. 
With the cost of about 200 killed on either side, the Convention 
crushed the royalist or malcontent reaction, and imposed on 
France a form of government which ensured the perpetuation of 
democracy though in a bureaucratic form — the first of those 
changes which paved the way to power for Bonaparte. For the 
constitution of the year 1795 which inaugurated the period of 
the Directory (1 795-1799) see French Revolution. Here we 
may notice that the perpetuation of the republic by means of 
the armed forces tended to exalt the army at the expense of the 
civil authorities. The repetition of the same tactics by Bonaparte 
in Fructidor, 1797, served still more decidedly to tilt the balance 
in favour of the sword, with results which were to be seen at the 
coup <TUat of Brumaire 1799. 

The events which helped the disgraced officer of August 1795 
to impose his will on France in November 1799 now claim our 
attention. The services which he rendered to the republic at 
Vendemiaire brought as their reward the hand of Josephine 
de Beauharnais. The influence of Barras with this fashionable 
lady helped on the match. At the outset she felt some repugnance 
for the thin sallow-faced young officer, and was certainly terrified 
by his ardour and by the imperious egoism of his nature; but 
she consented to the union, especially when he received the 
promise of the command of the French army of Italy. The story 
that he owed this promotion solely to the influence of Barras 
and Josephine is, however, an exaggeration. It is now known that 
the plans of campaign which he had drawn up for that army 
had enlisted the far more influential support of Carnot on his 
behalf. In January 1796 he drew up another plan for the 
conquest of Italy, which gained the assent of the Directory. 
Vendemiaire and the marriage with Josephine (9th of March 
1796) were but stepping-stones to the attainment of the end 
which he had kept steadily in sight since the spring of the year 
1794. For the events of this campaign in Italy see French 
Revolutionary Wars. The success at the bridge of Lodi (roth of 
May) seems first to have inspired in the young general dreams of a 
grander career than that of a successful general of the Revolution; 
while his narrow escape at the bridge of Areola in November 
strengthened his conviction that he was destined for a great 
future. The means whereby he engaged the energies of the 
Italians on behalf of the French Republic and yet refrained 
from persecuting the Roman Catholic Church in the way only 
too common among revolutionary generals, bespoke political 
insight of no ordinary kind. From every dispute which he had 
with the central authorities at Paris he emerged victorious; 
and he took care to assure his ascendancy by sending presents 
to the Directors, large sums to the nearly bankrupt treasury 
and works of art to the museums of Paris. Thus when, after the 
crowning victory of Rivoli (14th of January 1797), Mantua 
surrendered and the Austrian rule in Italy for the time collapsed, 
Bonaparte was virtually the idol of the French nation, the 
master of the Directory and potentially the protector of the 
Holy See. 

It may be well to point out here the salient features in Bona- 
parte's conduct towards the states of northern Italy. While 
arousing the enthusiasm of their inhabitants on behalf of France, 
he in private spoke contemptuously of them, mercilessly sup- 
pressed all outbreaks caused by the exactions and plundering 
of his army, and carefully curbed the factions which the new 
political life soon developed. On his first entry into Milan 
(15th of May 1796) he received a rapturous welcome as the 
liberator of Italy from the Austrian yoke; but the instructions 
of the Directory allowed him at the outset to do little more than 
effect the organization of consultative committees and national 
guards in the chief towns of Lombardy. The successful course 
of the campaign and the large sums which he sent from Italy to 
the French exchequer served to strengthen his hold over' the 
Directors, and his constructive policy grew more decided. 
Thus, when the men of Reggio and Modena overthrew the rule 
of their duke, he at once accorded protection to them, as also to 
the inhabitants of the cities of Bologna and Ferrara when they 
broke away from papal authority. He even allowed the latter 
to send delegates to confer with those of the duchy at Modena, 
with the result that a political union was decreed in a state 
called the Cispadane Republic (16th of October 1796)- This 
action was due in large measure to the protection of Bonaparte. 

	xix. 7 

The men of Lombardy, emboldened by his tacit encouragement, 
prepared at the close of the year to form a republic, which 
assumed the name of Transpadane, and thereafter that of 
Cisalpine. Its constitution was drawn up in the spring of 
1797 by committees appointed, and to some extent supervised, 
by him; and he appointed the first directors, deputies and chief 
administrators of the new state (July 1797). The union of these 
republics took place on the 15th of July 1797. The bounds 
of the thus enlarged Cisalpine Republic were afterwards ex- 
tended eastwards to the banks of the Adige by the terms of 
the treaty of Campo Formio; and in November 1797 Bonaparte 
added the formerly Swiss district of the Valtelline, north-east 
of Lake Como, to its territory. Much of this work of reorganiza- 
tion was carried on at the castle of Montebello, or Mombello, 
near Milan, where he lived in almost viceregal pomp (May-July, 
1797). Taking advantage of an outbreak at Genoa, he over- 
threw that ancient oligarchy, replaced it by a form of government 
modelled on that of France (June 6th); and subsequently it 
adopted the name of the Ligurian Republic. 

Concurrently with these undertakings, he steadily prepared to 
strengthen his position in the political life of France; and it will 
be well to notice the steps by which he ensured the defeat of the 
royalists in France and the propping up of the directorial system 
in the coup d J itat of Fructidor 1797. The unrest in France in the 
years 1795-^97 resulted mainly from the harshness, incom- 
petence and notorious corruption of the five Directors who, 
after the 13th of Vendemiaire 1795, practically governed France. 
All those who wished for peace and orderly government came by 
degrees to oppose the Directors; and, seeing that the latter clung 
to Jacobinical catchwords and methods, public opinion tended 
to become " moderate " or even royalist. This was seen in the 
elections for one-third of the 750 members composing the two 
councils of the nation (the Anciens and the Council of Five 
Hundred); they gave the moderates a majority alike in that 
of the older deputies and in that of the younger deputies (April 
1797), and that majority elected Barthelemy, a well-known 
moderate, as the fifth member of the Directory. Carnot, the 
ablest administrator, but not the strongest man, soon joined 
Barthe'lemy in opposing their Jacobinical colleagues — Barras, 
Rewbell and Larevelliere-Lepeaux. Time was on the side of 
the moderates; they succeeded in placing General Pichegru, 
already known for his tendencies towards constitutional monarchy, 
in the presidential chair of the Council of Five Hundred; and 
they proceeded to agitate, chiefly through the medium of a 
powerful club founded at Clichy, for the repeal of the revolu- 
tionary and persecuting laws. The three Jacobinical Directors 
thereupon intrigued to bring to Paris General Lazarre Hoche 
and his army destined for the invasion of Ireland for the purpose 
of coercing their opponents; but these, perceiving the danger, 
ordered Hoche to Paris, rebuked him for bringing his army 
nearer to the capital than was aDowed by law, and dismissed 
him in disgrace. 

The failure of Hoche led the three Directors to fix their hopes 
on Bonaparte. The commander of the ever-victorious army of 
Italy had recently been attacked by one of the moderates in the 
councils ior proposing to hand over Venice to Austria. This 
cession was based on political motives, which Bonaparte judged 
to be of overwhelming force; and he now decided to support 
the Directors and overthrow the moderates. Prefacing his action 
by a violent tirade against the royalist conspirators of Clichy, 
he sent to Paris General Augereau, well known for his brusque 
behaviour and demagogic Jacobinism. This officer rushed to 
Paris, breathing out threats of slaughter against all royalists, 
and entered into close relations with Barras. In order to dis- 
count the chances of failure, Bonaparte warned the three Directors 
that Augereau was a turbulent politician, not to be trusted over- 
much. Events, indeed, might readily have gone in favour of 
the moderates had Carnot acted with decision; but he relapsed 
into strange inactivity, while Barras and his military tool 
prepared to coerce the majority. Before dawn of September 
the 4th (18 Fructidor) Augereau with 2000 soldiers marched 
against the Tuileries, where the councils were sitting, dispersed 
their military guards, arrested several deputies and seized 
Barthelemy in his bed. Carnot, on receiving timely warning, 
fled from the Luxemburg palace and made his way to Switzer- 
land. The remembrance of the fatal day of Vendemiaire 1795 
perhaps helped to paralyse the majority. In any case exile, and 
death in the prisons of Cayenne, now awaited the timid champions 
of law and order; while parliamentary rule sustained a shock 
from which it never recovered. The Councils allowed the elec- 
tions to be annulled in forty-nine departments of France, and 
re-enacted some of the laws of the period of the Terror, notably 
those against non-juring priests and returned SmigrSs. The 
election of Merlin of Douay and Francois of Neufchatel as 
Directors, in place of Carnot and Barthelemy, gave to that body 
a compactness which enabled it to carry matters with a high 
hand, until the hatred felt by Frenchmen for this soulless revival 
of a moribund Jacobinism gradually endowed the Chambers 
with life and strength sufficient to provoke a renewal of strife 
with the Directory. These violent oscillations not only weakened 
the fabric of the Republic, but brought about a situation in 
which Bonaparte easily paralysed both the executive and the 
legislative powers so ill co-ordinated by the constitution of the 
year 1795. 

In the sphere of European diplomacy, no less than in that 
of French politics, the results of the coup d'itat of Fructidor 
were momentous. The Fructidorian Directors contemptuously 
rejected the overtures for peace which Pitt had recently made 
through the medium of Lord Malmesbury at Lille; and they 
further illustrated their desire for war and plunder by initiating 
a forward policy in central Italy and Switzerland which opened 
up a new cycle of war. The coup d'itat was favourable to Bona- 
parte; it ensured his hold over the Directors and enabled him 
to impose his own terms of peace on Austria; above all it left 
him free for the prosecution of his designs in a field of action 
which now held the first place in his thoughts — the Orient. 
Having rivalled the exploits of Caesar, he now longed to follow 
in the steps of Alexander the Great. 

At the time of his first view of the Adriatic (February 1797) 
he noted the importance of the port of Ancona for intercourse 
with the Sultan's dominions; and at that city fortune placed 
in his hands Russian despatches relative to the designs of the 
Tsar Paul on Malta. The incident reawakened the interest 
which had early been aroused in the young Corsican by converse 
with the savant Volney, author of Les Ruines, ou meditation sur 
les revolutions des empires. The intercourse which he had with 
Monge, the physicist and ex-minister of marine, during the 
negotiations with Austria, served to emphasize the orientation 
of his thoughts. This explains the eagerness with which he now 
insisted on the acquisition of the Ionian Isles by France and the 
political extinction of their present possessor, Venice. That city 
had given him cause for complaint, of which he made the most 
unscrupulous use. Thanks to the blind complaisance of its 
democrats and the timid subserviency of its once haughty 
olfgarchs, he became master of its fleet and arsenal (16th of May 
1797). Already, as may be seen by his letters to the Directory, 
he had laid his plans for the bartering away of the Queen of the 
Adriatic to Austria; and throughout the lengthy negotiations of 
the summer and early autumn of 1797 which he conducted with 
little interference from Paris, he adhered to his plan of gaining 
the fleet and the Ionian Isles; while the house of Habsburg 
was to acquire the city itself, together with all the mainland 
territories of the Republic as far west as the River Adige. In 
vain did the Austrian envoy, Cobenzl, resist the cession of the 
Ionian Isles to France; in vain did the Directors intervene in the 
middle of September with an express order that Venice must 
" not he ceded to Austria, but must, along with Friuli, be included 
in the Cisalpine Republic. To the subtle tenacity of Cobenzl he 
opposed a masterful violence: he checkmated the Directors, 
when they sought to thwart him in this and in other directions, 
by sending in once more his resignation with a letter in which he 
accused them of " horrible ingratitude." He was successful 
at all points. The Directors feared a rupture with the man 
to whom they owed their existence; and the house of Austria 
was fain to make peace with the general rather than expose itself 
to harder terms at the hands of the Directory. 

The treaty of Campo Formio, signed on the 17th of October 
1797, was therefore pre-eminently the work of Bonaparte. 
Already at Cherasco and Leoben he had dictated the preliminaries 
of peace to the courts of Turin and Vienna quite independently 
of the French Directory. At Campo Formio he showed himself 
the first diplomatist of the age, and the arbiter of the destinies 
of Europe. The terms were on the whole unexpectedly favour- 
able to Austria. In Italy she was to acquire the Venetian lands 
already named, along with Dalmatia and Venetian Istria. The 
rest of the Venetian mainland (the districts between the rivers 
Adige and Ticino) went to the newly constituted Cisalpine 
republic," France gaining the Ionian Isles and the Venetian fleet. 
The Emperor Francis renounced all claims to his former Nether- 
land provinces, which had been occupied by the French since 
the summer of 1794; he further ceded the Breisgau to the dis- 
possessed duke of Modena, agreed to summon a congress at 
Rastatt for the settlement of German affairs, and recognized the 
independence of the Cisalpine republic. In secret articles the 
emperor bound himself to use his influence at the congress of 
Rastatt in order to procure the cession to France of the Germanic 
lands west of the Rhine, while France promised to help him to 
acquire the archbishopric of Salzburg and a strip of land on the 
eastern frontier of Bavaria. 

After acting for a brief space as one of the French envoys to the 
congress of Rastatt, Napoleon returned to Paris early in December 
and received the homage of the Directors and the acclaim of the 
populace. The former sought to busy him by appointing him 
commander-in-chief of the Army of England, the island power 
being now the only one which contested French supremacy in 
Europe. In February 1798 he inspected the preparations for the 
invasion of England then proceeding at the northern ports. 
He found that they were wholly inadequate, and summed up his 
views in a remarkable letter to the Directory (23rd of February), 
wherein he pointed out two possible alternatives to an invasion of 
England, namely, a conquest of the coast of the north-west of 
Germany, for the cutting off of British commerce with central 
Europe, or the undertaking of an expedition to the Orient which 
would be equally ruinous to British trade. The inference was 
inevitable that, as German affairs were about to be profitably 
exploited by France in the bargains then beginning at Rastatt, 
she must throw her chief energies into the Egyptian expedition. 

One of the needful preliminaries of this enterprise" had already 
received his attention. In November 1797 he sent to Malta 
Poussielgue, secretary of the French legation at Genoa, on busi- 
ness which was ostensibly commercial but (as» he informed the 
Directory) " in reality to put the last touch to the design that 
we have on that island." The intrigues of the French envoy 
in corrupting the knights of the order of St John were completely 
successful. It remained, however, to find the funds needful 
for the equipment of a great expedition. Here the difficulties 
were great. The Directory, after the coup d'itat of Fructidor, 
had acknowledged a state of bankruptcy by writing off two- 
thirds of the national debt in a form which soon proved to be a 
thin disguise for repudiation. The return of a large part of the 
armed forces from Italy and Germany, where they had lived on 
the liberated inhabitants, also threw new burdens on the Republic; 
and it was clear that French money alone would not suffice to 
fit out an armada. Again, however, the financial situation was 
improved by conquest. The occupation of Rome in February 
1798 enabled Berthier to send a considerable sum to Paris and 
to style himself " treasurer to the chest of the Army of England." 
The invasion of Switzerland, which Bonaparte had of late 
persistently pressed on the Directory, proved to be an equally 
lucrative device, the funds in several of the cantonal treasuries 
being transferred straightway to Paris or Toulon. The conquest 
of north and central Italy also placed great naval resources at 
the disposal of France, Venice alone providing nine sail of the 
line and twelve frigates (see Bonaparte's letter of the 15th of 
November 1797), Genoa, Spezzia, Leghorn, Civita Vecchia 
and Ancona also supplied their quota in warships, transports, 
stores and sailors, with the result that the armada was ready 
for sea by the middle of May 1798. The secrecy maintained as 
to its destination was equally remarkable. The British govern- 
ment inclined to the belief that it was destined either for Ireland 
or for Naples. As the British fleet had abandoned the Mediter- 
ranean since November 1796 and had recently been disorganized 
by two serious mutinies, Bonaparte's plan of conquering Egypt 
was L by no means so rash as has sometimes been represented. 

The ostensible aims of the expedition, as drawn up by him, 
and countersigned by the Directory on the 1 2th of April, were 
the seizure of Egypt, the driving of the British from all their 
possessions in the East and the cutting of the Suez canal. But 
apart from these public aims there were private motives which 
weighed with Bonaparte. His relations to the Directors were 
most strained. They feared his ability and ambition; while 
he credited them with the design of poisoning him. Shortly 
before his starting, an open rupture was scarcely averted; 
and he and his brothers allowed the idea to get abroad that he 
was being virtually banished from France. It is certain, however, 
that his whole heart was in the expedition, which appealed to 
his love of romance and of the gigantic. His words to Joseph 
Bonaparte shortly before sailing are significant: " Our dreams 
of a republic were youthful illusions. Since the 9th of Thermidor, 
the republican instinct has grown weaker every day. To-day 
all eyes are on me: to-morrow they may be on another. ... I 
depart for the Orient with all the means of success at my disposal. 
If my country needs me, if there are additions to the number 
of those who share the opinion of Talleyrand, Sieves and Roederer, 
that war will break out again and that it will be unsuccessful 
for France, I will return, more sure of the feeling of the nation." 
He added, however, that if France waged a successful war, he 
would remain in the East, and do more damage to England 
there than by mere demonstrations in the English Channel. 

The Toulon fleet set sail on the 19th of May; and when the 
other contingents from the ports of France and Italy joined the 
flag, the armada comprised thirteen sail of the iine, fourteen 
frigates, many smaller warships and some three hundred trans- 
ports. An interesting feature of the expedition was the presence 
on board of several savants who were charged to examine the 
antiquities and develop the resources of Egypt. The chief had 
lately become a member of the Institute, and did his utmost 
to inflame in France that love of art and science which he had 
helped to kindle by enriching the museums of Paris with the 
treasures of Italy. By good fortune the armada evaded Nelson 
and arrived safely off Malta. Thanks to French intrigues, the 
Knights of Malta offered the tamest defence of their capital. 
During the week which he spent there, Bonaparte displayed 
marvellous energy in endowing the city with modern institutions; 
he even arranged the course of studies to be followed in the 
university. Setting sail for Egypt on the 19th of June, he 
again had the good fortune to elude Nelson and arrived off 
Alexandria on the 2nd of July. For an account of the Egyptian 
and Syrian campaigns see French Revolutionary Wars. 
But here we may point out the influence of the expedition on 
Egypt, on European politics and on the fortunes of Bonaparte. 
The chief direct result in the life of the Egyptian people was the 
virtual destruction of the governing caste of the Mamelukes, 
the Turks finding it easy to rid themselves of their surviving 
chiefs and to re-establish the authority of the Sultan. As for the 
benefits which Bonaparte and his savants helped to confer on 
Egypt, they soon vanished. The great canal was not begun; 
irrigation works were started but were soon given up. The 
letters of Kleber and Menou (the successors of Bonaparte) 
show that the expenditure on public works had been so reckless 
that the colony was virtually bankrupt at the time of Bonaparte's 
departure; and William Hamilton, who travelled through Egypt 
in 1802, found few traces, other than military, of the French 
occupation. The indirect results, however, were incalculably 
great. Though for the present the Sultan regained his hold 
' upon Egypt, yet in reality Bonaparte set in motion forces which 
could not be stayed until the ascendancy of one or other of the 
western maritime powers in that land was definitely decided. 

The effects of the expedition in the sphere of world-politics 
were equally remarkable and more immediate. The British 
government, alarmed by Bonaparte's attempt to intrigue with 
Tippoo Sahib, put forth all its strength in India and destroyed 
the power of that ambitious ruler. Nelson's capture of Malta 
(5th of September r8oo) also secured for the time a sure base 
for British fleets in the Mediterranean. A Russo-Turkish fleet 
wrested Corfu from the French; and the Neapolitan Bourbons, 
emboldened by the news of the battle of the Nile, began hostilities 
with France which preluded the war of the Second Coalition. 
In the domain of science the results of the expedition were of 
unique interest. The discovery of the Rosetta Stone furnished 
the key to Egyptian hieroglyphics; and archaeology, no less 
than the more practical sciences, acknowledges its debt of grati- 
tude to the man who first brought the valley of the Nile into close 
touch with the thought of the West. 

Finally, it should be noted that, amid the failure of the national 
aims which the Directory and Bonaparte set forth, his own 
desires received a startlingly complete fulfilment. The war of 
the Second Coalition having brought about the expulsion of 
the French from Italy, the Directors were exposed to a storm 
of indignation in France, not unmixed with contempt; and this 
state of public opinion enabled the young conqueror within a 
month of his landing at Frejus (9th of October 1799) easily to 
prevail over the Directory and the elective councils of the nation. 
In the spring of 1798 he had judged the pear to be not ripe; 
in Brumaire 1799 it came off almost at a touch. 

In order to understand the sharp swing of the political pendulum 
back from republicanism to autocracy which took place at 
Brumaire, it is needful to remember that the virtual failure of 
the Egyptian Expedition was then unknown. The news of 
Bonaparte's signal victory over the Turkish army at Aboukir 
aroused general rejoicings undimmed by any save the vaguest 
rumours of his reverse at Acre. In the popular imagination he 
seemed to be the only possible guarantor of victory abroad and 
order at home. This was unjust to the many men who were 
working, not without success, to raise the Republic out of its 
many difficulties. Massena's triumph at Zurich (September 
25th-26th, 1799) paralysed the Second Coalition; and, though 
the Austrians continued to make progress along the Italian 
riviera, the French Republic was in little danger on that side 
so long as it held Switzerland. 

The internal condition of France was also not so desperate 
as has often been represented. True, the Directory seemed on 
the point of collapse; it had been overcome by the popularly 
elected Chambers in the insignificant coup d'itat of 30 Prairial 
(18th of June) 1799; when Larevelliere-Lepeaux and Merlin 
were compelled to resign. The retirement of Rewbell a short 
time previously also rid France of a turbulent and corrupt 
administrator. His place was now filled by Sieves. This ex- 
priest, this disillusioned Jacobin and skilful spinner of cobweb 
constitutions, enjoyed for a time the chief reputation in France. 
His oracular reserve, personal honesty and consistency of aim 
had gained him the suffrages of all who hoped to save France 
from the harpies of the Directory and the violent rhetoricians 
of the now reconstituted Jacobin Club. He was known to dis- 
approve of the Directory both as an institution in the making of 
which he had had no hand, and of its personnel, with one excep- 
tion. This was natural. The new Directors, Gohier and Moulin, 
were honest but incapable and narrow-minded. As for Barras, 
his venality and vices outweighed even his capacity for successful 
intrigue. The fifth Director, Ducos, an ex-Girondin, was sure to 
swim with the stream. Clearly, then, the Directory was doomed. 

It was far otherwise with the Councils. A majority of the 
Ancients was ready to support Sieves and make drastic changes 
in the constitution; but in the Council of Five Hundred the 
prevalent feeling was democratic or even Jacobinical. The 
aim of Sieves was to perpetuate the republic, but in a bureau- 
cratic or autocratic form. With this aim in view he sought to 
find a man possessing ability in war and probity in civil affairs, 
who would act as figure-head to his long projected constitution. 
For a time affairs moved as he wished. The Jacobin Club was 
closed, thanks to the ability of Fouch6, the new minister of 
Police; but the hopes of Sieyes were dashed by the death of 
General Joubert, commander of the Army of Italy, at the 
disastrous battle of Novi (15th of August). The dearth of ability 
among the generals left in France (Kleber and Desaix were in 
Egypt) was now painfully apparent. Moreau was notoriously 
lethargic in civil affairs. Bernadotte, Jourdan and Augereau 
had compromised themselves by close association with the 
Jacobins. The soldiery had never forgiven Massena his pecula- 
tions after the capture of Rome. One name, and one alone, 
leaped to men's thoughts, that of Bonaparte. 

He arrived from Egypt at the psychological moment, and his 
journey from Frejus to Paris resembled a triumphant procession. 
Nevertheless he acted with the utmost caution. A fortnight 
passed before he decided to support Sieyes in effecting a change 
in the constitution; and by then he had captivated all men 
except Bernadotte and a few intransigeant Jacobins. Talleyrand, 
Roederer, Cambaceres and R6al were among his special con- 
fidants, his brothers Joseph and Lucien also giving useful 
advice. Of the generals, Murat, Berthier, Lannes and Leclerc 
were those who prepared the way for the coup d'etat. Fouche, 
pulling the wires through the police, was an invaluable helper. 
The conduct of Barras was known to depend on material 
considerations. 

All being ready, the Ancients on the 18 Brumaire (9th of 
November) decreed .the transference of the sessions of both 
Councils to St Cloud, on the plea of a Jacobin plot which 
threatened the peace of Paris. They also placed the troops in 
Paris and its neighbourhood under the cpmmand of Bonaparte. 
Thereupon Sieyes and Ducos resigned office. Barras, after a cal- 
culating delay, followed suit. Gohier and Moulin, on refusing 
to retire, were placed under a military guard; and General 
Moreau showed his political incapacity by discharging this duty, 
for the benefit of Bonaparte. 

Nevertheless the proceedings of St Cloud on the day following 
bade fair to upset the best-laid schemes of Bonaparte and his 
' coadjutors. The Five Hundred, meeting in the Orangerie of 
the palace, had by this time seen through the plot; and, on the 
entrance of the general with four grenadiers, several deputies 
rushed at him, shook him violently, while others vehemently 
demanded a decree of outlawry against the new Cromwell. He 
himself lost his nerve, stammered, nearly fainted, and was dragged 
out by the soldiers in a state of mental and physical collapse. 
The situation was saved solely by the skill of his brother Lucien, 
then president of the Council. He refused to put the vote of 
outlawry, uttered a few passionate words, cast off his official 
robes, declared the session at an end, and made his way out under 
protection of a squad of grenadiers. The coup d J Uat seemed to 
have failed. In reality matters now rested with the troops out- 
side. Stung to action by some words of Sieyes, Bonaparte 
appealed to the troops of the line in terms which provoked a 
ready response. Imprecations uttered by Lucien against 
the brigands and traitors in the pay of England decided the 
grenadiers of the Council to march against the deputies whom 
it was their special duty to protect. Drums beat the charge, 
Murat led the way through the corridors of the palace to the 
Orangerie, and levelled bayonets ended the existence of the 
Council. Within the space of ten and a half years from the 
summoning of the States-General at Versailles (May 1789), 
parliamentary government fell beneath the sword. 

Lucien now consolidated the work of the soldiery by procuring 
from the Ancients a decree which named Bonaparte, Sieyes and 
Ducos as provisional consuls, while a legislative commission was 
appointed to report on necessary changes in the constitution. 
Lucien also gathered together a small group of the younger 
deputies to throw the cloak of legality over the events of the 
day. The Rump proceeded to expel sixty-one Jacobins from 
the Council of Five Hundred, adjourned its sessions until the 19th 
of February 1800, and appointed a commission of twenty-five 
members with power to act in the meantime. Clearly the success 
of the coup d'itat of Brumaire was due in the last resort to Lucien 
Bonaparte. 

The Parisians received the news of the event with joy, be- 
lieving that freedom was now at last to be established on a firm 
basis by the man whose name was the synonym for victory in the 
field and disinterestedness in dvil affairs. " People are full of 
mirth " (wrote Madame Reinhard, wife of the minister for 
Foreign Affairs, four days later) " believing that they have 
regained liberty." She added that all the parties except the 
Jacobins were full of confidence; and that the nobles now 
cherished hopes of a reaction, seeing that the reduction of the 
number of rulers from five to three pointed towards monarchy. 
Her comment on this delusion is instructive. Three consuls 
had been appointed, she remarked, precisely in order that power 
might not be vested in the hands of one man. 

Only by degrees did the events of the 19th of Brumaire stand 
but in their real significance; for the new consuls, installed at 
the Luxemburg palace, and somewhat later at the Tuileries, 
took care that the new constitution, which they along with the 
two commissions were now secretly drawing up, should not be 
promulgated until Paris and France had settled down to the 
ordinary life of pleasure and toil. In the meantime they won 
credit by popular measures such as the abolition of forced loans 
and of the objectionable habit of seizing hostages from the 
districts of the west where the royalist ferment was still strongly 
working. 

The feelings of suprise at the clemency and moderation 
with which the victors used their powers predisposed men every- 
where to accept their constitution. Sieyes now sketched its out- 
lines in vaguely republican forms; thereupon Bonaparte freely 
altered them and gave them strongly personal touches. The 
theorist laid before the joint commission his projet, the result of 
five years of cogitation, only to have it ridiculed by the great 
soldier. In one respect alone did it suit him. While restoring 
the principle of universal suffrage, which had been partially 
abrogated in 1795, Sieyes rendered this system of election 
practically a nullity. The voters were to choose one-tenth of 
their number (notabilities of the commune) ; one-tenth of these 
would form the notabilities of the department; while by a 
similar decimal sifting, the notabilities of the nation were selected. 
The final and all-important act of selection from among these 
men was, however, to be made by a personage, styled the pro- 
clamateur-ilecteur, who chose all the important functionaries, and, 
conjointly with the notabilities of the nation, chose the members 
for the Council of State (wielding the chief executive powers), 
the Tribunate and the Senate. The latter body would, however, 
have the power to " absorb " the head of the state if he showed 
signs of ambition. Against this power of absorption Bonaparte 
declaimed vehemently, asserting also that the proclamateur- 
ilecteur would be a mere cochon & Vengrais. In vain did Sieyes 
modify his scheme so as to provide for two consuls, one holding 
the chief executive powers for war, the other for peace. This 
division of powers was equally distasteful to Bonaparte: he 
formed a kind of cabal within the joint commission, and there 
intimidated the theorist, with the result already foreseen by the 
latter. Sieyes, conscious that his political mechanism would 
merely winnow the air, until the profoundly able and forceful 
man at his side adapted it to the work of government, relapsed 
into silence; and his resignation of the office of consul, together 
with that of Ducos, was announced as imminent. Bonaparte 
further brushed aside a frankly democratic constitution pro- 
posed by Daunou, and intimidated his opponents in the joint 
commission by a threat that he would himself draft a constitution 
and propose it to the people in a mass vote. 

This was what really happened. They looked on helplessly 
while he refashioned the scheme of Sieyes. Keeping the electoral 
machinery almost unchanged (save that the lists of notables 
were to be permanent) Bonaparte entirely altered the upper parts 
of the constitutional pyramid reared by the philosopher. Improv- 
ing upon the procedure of the Convention in Vendemiaire 1795* 
Bonaparte procured the nomination of three consuls in an 
article of the new constitution; they were Bonaparte (First 
Consul), Cambacires and Lebrun. The latter two, uniting with 
I the two retiring consuls, Sieyes and Ducos, were to form the 
nucleus of the senate and choose the majority among its full 
complement of sixty members, the minority being thereafter 
chosen by co-optation. To the senate, thus chosen " from 
above/' was allotted the important task of supervising the 
constitution, and of selecting, from among the notabilities of 
the nation, the members of the Corps Ugislatif and the Tribunate. 
These two bodies nominally formed the legislature, the Tribunate 
merely discussing the bills sent to it by an important body, the 
Council of State; while the Corps Ugislatif, sitting in silence, 
heard them defended by councillors of state and criticized by 
members of the Tribunate; thereupon it passed or rejected 
such proposals by secret voting. Thus, the initiative in law- 
making lay with the Council of State; but, as its members were 
all chosen by the First Consul, it is clear that that important 
duty was vested really in him. The executive powers were 
placed almost entirely in his hands, as will be seen by the terms of 
article 41 which defined his functions: " The First Consul 
promulgates the laws; he appoints and dismisses at will the 
members of the Council of State, the ministers, the ambassadors 
and other leading agents serving abroad, the officers of the army 
and navy, the members of local administrative bodies and the 
commissioners of government attached to the tribunals. He 
names all the judges for criminal and civil cases, other than the 
juges de paix (magistrates) and the judges of the Cour de cassation, 
without having the power to discharge them." — As for the second 
and third consuls, their functions were almost entirely con- 
sultative and formal, their opposition being recorded, but 
having no further significance against the fiat of the First Consul. 
Bonaparte's powers were subsequently extended in the years 
1802, 1804 and 1807; but it is clear that autocracy was prac- 
tically established by his own action in the secret commission 
of 1799. The new constitution was promulgated on the 15th of 
December 1799 and in a plebiscite held during January 1800 it 
received the support of 3,011,007 voters, only 1562 persons 
voting against it. The fact that the three new consuls had 
entered upon office and set the constitutional machinery in 
motion fully six weeks before the completion of the plebiscite, 
detracts somewhat from the impressiveness of the vox populi 
on that occasion. 

Bonaparte selected his ministers with much skill. They were 
Talleyrand, Foreign Affairs; Berthier, War; Abrial, Justice; 
Luden Bonaparte, Interior; Gaudin, Finance; Forfait, Navy 
and Colonies. Maret became secretary of state to the consuls. 
Bonaparte's selection gave general satisfaction, as also did the 
personnel of the Council of State (divided into five sections for 
the chief spheres of government) and of the other organs of state. 
Many of the furious Terrorists now became quiet and active 
councillors or administrators, the First Consul adopting the plan 
of multiplying " places," of overwhelming all officials with work, 
and of busying the watch-dogs of the Jacobinical party by 
" throwing them bones to gnaw." 

In our survey of the career of Napoleon, we have now reached 
the time of the Consulate (November 1790-May 1804), whichr 
marks the zenith of his mental powers and creative activity. 
Externally, and in a personal sense, the period falls into two 
parts. The former of these extends to August 1802, when the 
powers of the First Consul, which had been decreed for ten years, 
were prolonged to the duration of his life. But in another and 
wider sense the Consulate has a well-defined unity; it is the 
time when France gained most of her institutions and the essentials 
of her machinery of government. 

The reader is referred to the article France {Law and Institutions) 
for the information respecting the various codes dating from this* 
period, and to the article Concordat for the famous measure 
whereby Napoleon re-established official relations between the state 
and the church in France. More pressing even than that question 
was the regulation of local government. Bonaparte's action in this 
matter was so characteristic as to deserve close attention. Un- 
doubtedly the question was one of great importance; for local affairs 
had fallen into chaos. The aim of the constituent assembly in its 
departmental system (1789-1700) had been to vest local affairs 
ultimately in councils elected by universal suffrage, alike in the 
department and in the three smaller areas within it. These councils 
B ui t ^ ie execut * ve officers dependent on them soon proved to be un- 
able to manage even local affairs efficiently, while they were very 
lax in the collection of the national taxes unwisely entrusted to them. 
Lack of central control over the virtually independent communes 
(over forty thousand in number) led to a sharp rebound under the 
Convention, when all matters of importance were disposed of by 
commissioners appointed by that body. The relations between 
national and local authorities fluctuated considerably during the 
Directory; and it is noteworthy that the constitution of December 
1 799 placed local administration merely under the control of ministers 
at Paris. Everything, therefore, portended a change in this sphere, 
but few persons expected a change so drastic as that which Bonaparte 
now brought about in the measure of 28 Pluvidse, year VIII. (16th 
of February 1800). Certainly no measure marked more clearly the 
abandonment of democratic ideals. The powers formerly vested in 
elective bodies werenow to be wielded by prefects and sub-prefects, 
nominated by the First Consul and responsible to him. The elective 
councils for the department and for the arrondissement (a new area 
which replaced the " districts " of the year 1795) continued to exist, 
but they sat only for a fortnight in the year and had to deal mainly 
with the assessment of taxes for their respective areas. They might 
be consulted by the prefect or sub-prefect; but they had no hold 
over _ him. The municipal councils had^ slightly larger powers, 
relating to loans, octrois, &c. But the chief municipal officer, the 
mayor, was chosen by the prefect. The police of all towns containing 
more than 100,000 inhabitants was controlled by the central 
government. 

It is significant that Bonaparte proposed this bill (drafted in the 
Council of State) to the Tribunate and the Corps Ugislatif on the 
very day on which it was first certainly known that France had 
accepted the new constitution. The opposition in the Tribunate 
was sharp, but was paralysed by the knowledge of the fact just 
named and by the lack of a free press. The bill passed there by 
71 votes to 25; and in the Corps Ligislatif by 217 to 68. The 
acquiescence of these bodies in the transition to despotic methods 
predisposed the public to a similar attitude of mind. At first the 
sharpness of the change was not fully apparent owing to the tactful 
choice of prefects made by the First Consul; but before long their 
very extensive powers were seen to form an important part of the 
new machinery of autocracy. In this connexion we may note that 
the disturbances, mainly royalist but sometimes Jacobinical, in 
several districts of France enabled Bonaparte to propose the estab- 
lishment in the troubled districts of special tribunals for the trial of 
all offences tending to disturb the general peace. Here again the 
Tribunate offered a vehement opposition to the measure, and in 
spite of official pressure passed the bill only by a majority of eight. 
Becoming law on 18 Pluvi6se, year IX. (6th of February 1801), it 
enabled the government to supersede the ordinary judicial machinery 
for political offences in no # fewer than thirty-two departments. 

Bonaparte signalized his tenure of power by no very important 
developments in the sphere of elementary education. This was left 
to the local authorities, and led to little result. _ The more advanced 
schools, known as icoles centrales, were reconstituted either as icoles 
secondares or as lycies by the law of the 30th of April 1802. The 
former of these were designed for the completion of the training of 
the most promising pupils in the communal elementary schools, 
and were left to local control or even to management by private 
individuals. Far more important, however, were the lycies, where 
an excellent education was imparted, semi-military in form and 
under the control of government. It gained valuable powers' of 
patronage by founding 6400 exhibitions {bourses) in connexion with 
the lyc6es; 2400 of which were reserved for the sons of soldiers and 
government officials. The same centralizing tendency is strongly 
marked in the organization of the university of France, the general 
principle of which was set forth in May 1806, while the details were 
arranged by that of March the 17th, 1808. It was designed to control 
all the educational institutions of France, both public and private; 
and it did so with two exceptions, the Museum and the College de 
France. The discipline was strict. Fidelity to the emperor and to 
the teaching of the Roman Catholic doctrine formed part of the aims 
of this comprehensive corporation. Its officers were required to 
obey " the statutes of the teaching body, which have for their object 
uniformity of instruction, and^ which tend^ to form for the state 
citizens attached to their religion, their prince, their country and 
their family." These words sufficiently illustrate the essentially 
political character of the institution. Its organization was com- 
pleted by the decree of the 15th of November 181 1. Napoleon's 
ideas on the education of girls may be judged by this extract from 
his speech at the Council of State on the 1st of March 1806: " I 
do not think that we need trouble ourselves with any plan of in- 
struction for young females: they cannot be better brought up than 
by their mothers. Public education is not suitable for them, because 
they are never called upon to act in public. Manners are all in all 
to them, and marriage is all they look to." 

Returning to the period of the Consulate, we notice the founding 
of an institution which also had its complete development during 
the Empire, namely, the Legion of Honour (19th of May 1802). 
Napoleon intended it as a protest against the spirit of equality 
which pervaded revolutionary thought. In one respect the new 
institution marked an enormous advance on titles of nobility, which 
had been granted nearly always for warlike exploits, or merely 
as a mark of the favour of the sovereign. The First Consul, on the 
other hand, sought to recognize and reward merit in all walks of life. 
Nevertheless his proposal met with strong opposition in the Corps 
Ligislatif and Tribunate, where members saw that it portended 
a revival of the older distinction. This was so: abolished in 1790 
by the constituent assembly, titles of nobility were virtually restored 
by Napoleon in 1806 and legally in 1808. Side by side with them 
there continued to exist the Legion of Honour. It was organized 
in fifteen cohorts, each comprising seven grand officers, twenty com- 
manders, thirty officers and 350 legionaries. A stipend, ranging 
from 5000 francs a year to 250 francs, was attached to each grade of 
the institution. The benefits attaching to membership and the 
number of the members were increased during the Empire, when the 
average number somewhat exceeded thirty thousand. Napoleon 's 
aim of bidding for the support of all able men is disagreeably promi- 
nent in all details of this institution, which may be looked upon as 
the tangible outcome of the conviction which he thus frankly ex- 
pressed: "In ambition is to be found the chief motive-force of 
humanity; and a man puts forth his best powers in proportion to 
his hopes of advancement." 

The success of Bonaparte in reorganizing Francemay be ascribed 
to his determined practicality and to his perception of the needs 
of the average man. Since the death of Mirabeau no one had 
appeared who could strike the happy mean and enforce his will on 
the extremes on either side. Bonaparte did so with a forcefulness 
rarely possessed by that usually mediocre creature, the moderate 
man. 

It is time now to notice the chief events which ensured the 
ascendancy of Bonaparte. Military, diplomatic and police affairs 
were skilfully made to conduce to that result. In the first of 
these spheres the victory of Marengo (14th of June 1800) was of 
special importance, as it consolidated the reputation of Bonaparte 
at a time when republican opposition was gathering strength. As 
Lucien Bonaparte remarked, if Marengo had been lost — and it 
was saved only by Desaix and Kellermann — the Bonaparte 
family would have been proscribed. Negotiations for peace now 
followed; but they led to nothing, until Moreau's triumph at 
Hohcnlinden (December 2nd, 1800) brought the court of Vienna 
to a state of despair. By the treaty with Austria, signed by 
Joseph Bonaparte at Luneville on the 9th of February 1801, 
France regained all that she had won at Campo Formio, much 
of which had been lost for a time in the war of the Second Coali- 
tion. True, she now agreed to recognise the independence of the 
Cisalpine, Ligurian, Helvetic and Batavian (Dutch) republics; 
but the masterful acquisitiveness of the First Consul and the 
weak conduct of Austrian and British affairs at that time soon 
made that clause of the treaty a dead letter. Bonaparte mean- 
while, by dexterous behaviour to Paul I. of Russia, had won 
the friendship of that potentate, whose resentment against his 
former allies, Austria and England, facilitated a re-grouping of 
the Powers. The new Franco-Russian entente helped on the 
formation of the Armed Neutrality League and led to the con- 
coction of schemes for the driving of the British" from India. 
But these undertakings were thwarted in March-April 1801 by 
the murder of the tsar Paul and by Nelson's victory at Copen- 
hagen. The advent of the more peaceful and Anglophile tsar, 
Alexander I. (g.v.), brought about the dissolution of the League, 
and the abandonment of the oriental schemes which Bonaparte 
had so closely at heart. Another disappointment befel him irt the 
same quarter, the surrender of the French forces in Egypt to 
the British expedition commanded first by General Abercromby 
and afterwards by General John Hely-Hutchinson (30th *of 
August 1801). 

These events disposed both Bonaparte and the British cabinet 
towards peace. He was all powerful on land, they on the sea; 
and for the present each was powerless to harm the » other. 
Bonaparte in particular discerned the advantages which peace 
would bring in the consolidation of his position. The beginning 
of negotiations had been somewhat facilitated by the resignation 
. of Pitt (4th of February 1801) and the advent to office of Henry; 
Addington. Bonaparte, perceiving the weakness of Addington, 
both as a man and as a minister, pressed him hard; and both the 
Preliminaries of Peace, concluded at London on the 1st of October 
1801, and the terms of the treaty of Amiens (27th of March 1803) 
were such as to spread through the United Kingdom a feeling of v 
annoyance. In everything which related to the continent of 
Europe and to the resumption of trade relations between Great 
Britain and France, Bonaparte had his way; and he abated 
his demands only in a few questions relating to India and New- 
foundland. 

The terms of the treaty of Amiens may be thus summarized: 
Great Britain restored to France the colonial possessions (almost 
the whole of the French colonial empire) conquered in the late 
war. Of their many maritime conquests the British retained 
only the Spanish island of Trinidad and the Dutch settlements 
in Ceylon. Their other conquests at the expense of these allies 
of France were restored to them, including the Cape of Good 
Hope to the Dutch. France recognized the integrity of the 
Turkish Empire and promised an indemnity to the House of 
Orange exiled from the Batavian (Dutch) Republic since 1704. 
She further agreed to evacuate the papal states, Taranto and 
other towns in the Mediterranean coasts which she had occupied. 
The independence of the Ionian Isles (now reconstituted as the 
Republic of the Seven Islands) was guaranteed. As to Malta, 
the United Kingdom was to restore it to the order of St John 
(its possessors previous to 1798) when the Great Powers had 
guaranteed its independence. It was to receive a Neapolitan 
garrison for a year, and, if necessary, for a longer time. 

No event in the life of Bonaparte was more auspicious than the 
conclusion of this highly advantageous bargain. By retaining 
nearly all the continental conquests of France, and by recovering 
every one of those which the British had made at her expense 
beyond the seas, he achieved a feat which was far beyond the 
powers even of Louis XIV. The gratitude of the French for 
this triumph found expression in a proposal, emanating from the 
Tribunate, that the First Consul should receive a pledge of the 
gratitude of the nation. When referred to the senate, the 
matter underwent secret manipulation, largely through the in- 
fluence of Cambaceres; but the republican instinct even in the 
senate was sufficiently strong to thwart the intrigues of the second 
consul; and that body on the 8th of May merely re-elected 
Bonaparte for a second term of ten years after the expiration 
of the first decennial term for which he was chosen. This fell 
far short of his desires, and he now dexterously referred the 
whole question to the nation at large. The Council of State, 
acting on a suggestion made by Cambaceres, now intervened with 
telling effect. It altered the wording of the senatorial proposal 
in such a way that the nation was asked to vote on the question: 
" Is Napoleon Bonaparte to be made Consul for Life ? " France 
responded by an overwhelming affirmative, 3,568,885 votes being 
cast for the proposal and only 8374 against it. 

Napoleon (who now used his Christian name instead of the 
surname Bonaparte) thereupon sent proposals for various changes 
in the constitution, which were at once registered by the obsequious 
Council of State and the Senate on the 4th of August (16 Ther- 
midor) 1802. Besides holding his powers for life, he now gained 
the right of nominating his successor. He alone could ratify 
treaties of peace and alliance, and on his nomination fifty-four 
senators were added to the senate, which thereafter numbered 
one hundred and twenty members appointed by him alone. 
This body received the right of deciding by senatus consulta all 
questions not provided for by the constitution; the Corps 
JJgislatif and Tribunate might also thenceforth be dissolved at 
its bidding. In short, the First Consul now became the irre- 
sponsible ruler of France, governing the country through the 
ministry, the Council of State and the Senate. As for the 
chambers, based avowedly on universal suffrage, their existence 
thenceforth was ornamental or sepulchral. The constitutional 
changes of August 1802, initiated solely by "Bonaparte, made 
France an absolute monarchy. The name of Empire was not 
adopted until nearly two years later; but the change then 
brought about was scarcely more than titular. 

In order to understand the utter inability of the old republican 
party to withstand these changes, it is needful to retrace our steps 
and consider the skilful use made by Bonaparte of plots and disturb- 
ances as they occurred. As was natural, when he sought to steer a 
middle course between the Scylla of royalism and 'the Charybdis of 
Jacobinism, disturbances were to be expected on both sides" of the 
consular ship of state. The first of these was an unimportant affair, 
probably nursed by the agents provocateurs of Fouche's ubiquitous 
police. It purported to be an undertaking entered into by a few 
Jacobins, among them Arena, a Corsican, for the murder of Bona- 
parte at the opera. Ar6na and his supposed accomplice were arrested 
(10th of October 1800); and that was virtually the beginning and 
the end of the plot. Far more serious was the danger to be appre- 
hended from the royalists. Enraged by Bonaparte's contemptuous 
refusal to encourage the return of" Louis XVIII." to his own, the 
royalists began to compass the death of the man whom they had at 
first naively looked on as a potential General Monk to their Charles II. 
Their chief man of action was a sturdy Breton peasant, Georges 
Cadoudal, whose zeal and courage served to bring to a head plans 
long talked over by the confidants of the Comte d'Artois (the future 
Charles X. of France) in London. The outcome of it was the des- 
patch of some five or six Chouan desperadoes to Paris, three of whom 
exploded an infernal machine close to Bonaparte's carriage in the 
narrow streets near the Tuileries (3rd Niv6se [24th of December] 
1800). Bonaparte and Josephine escaped uninjured, but several 
bystanders were killed or wounded. Napoleon's vengeance at once 
took a strongly practical turn. Despite the evidence which Fouche 
and others brought forward to incriminate the royalists^ the First 
Consul persisted in attributing the outrage to the Jacobins, had a 
list of suspects drawn up, and caused the Council of State to declare 
that a special precautionary measure was necessary. The measure 
proved to be the deportation of the leading Jacobins; and a cloak 
of legality was cast over this extraordinary proceeding by a special 
decree of the senate (avowedly the guardian of the constitution) 
that this act of the government was a " measure tending to preserve 
the constitution " (5th of January 1801). The body charged with 
the guarding of the constitution was thus brought by Bonaparte 
to justify its violation; and a way was thus opened for the legalizing 
of further irregularities. For the present the connivance of the 
senate at his coup d'itat of Niv6se led to the deportation of one 
hundred and thirty Jacobins; some were interned in the islands of 
the Bay of Biscay, while fifty were sent to the tropical colonies of 
France, whence few of them ever returned. It is to be observed that, 
before the punishment was inflicted, evidence was forthcoming which 
brought home the outrage of Niv6se to the royalists; but this was 
all one to Bonaparte; his aim was to destroy the Jacobin party, 
and it never recovered from the blow. The party which had set up 
the Committee of Public Safety was now struck down by the very 
man who through the Directory inherited by direct lineal descent 
the dictatorial powers instituted in the spring of 1793 forthe salva- 
tion of the republic. It remains to add that the suspects in the plot 
of October 1800 were now guillotined (31st of January 1801), and 
that two of the plotters closely connected with the affair of Niv6se 
were also executed (21st of April). The institution of the special 
tribunals (already referred to), which enabled Bonaparte to supersede 
local government in thirty-two of the departments, was another 
outcome of the bomb conspiracy. 

Far more lenient was Bonaparte's conduct towards a knot of dis- 
contented officers who, in April-May 1802, framed a clumsy plot, 
known as the "Plot of the Placards," for arousing the soldiery 
against him. He disgraced or imprisoned the ringleaders, ordered 
Bernadotte (perhaps the fountain head of the whole affair) to take 
the waters at Plombi&res and drove from office Fouch6, who had 
sought to screen the real offenders by impugning the royalists. 

Bonaparte's action in the years 1 800-1 802 showed that he feared 
the old republican party far more than the royalists. In April 1802 
he procured the passing of a senatus consultum granting increased 
facilities for the return of the Smigres; with few exceptions they were 
allowed to return, provided that it was before the 2^rd of September 
1802, and, after swearing to obey the new constitution, they entered 
into possession of their lands which had not been alienated; but 
barriers were raised against the recovery of their confiscated lands. 
Very many accepted these terms, rallied to the First Consul with 
more or less sincerity; and their return to ]F ranee to strengthen 
the conservative elements in French society. The promulgation of 
the Concordat (18th of April 1802) and the institution of what was 
in all but name a state religion tended strongly in the same direction, 
the authority of the priests being generally used in support of the 
man to whom Chateaubriand applied the epithet " restorer of the 
altars." Nevertheless, despite Bonaparte's marvellous skill in 
rallying moderate men of all parties^ to .his side, there remained 
an unconvinced and desperate minority, whose clumsy procedure 
enabled the great engineer to hoist them with their own petard 
and to raise himself to the imperial dignity. But before referring 
to this last proof of the Machiavellian skill of the great Corsican in 
dealing with plots, it is needful to notice the events which brought 
him into collision with the British nation. 

The treaty of Amiens had contained germs which ensured its 
dissolution at no distant date; but even more serious was the 
conduct of Bonaparte after the conclusion of peace. He carried 
matters with so high a hand in the affairs of Holland, Switzerland 
and Italy as seriously to diminish the outlets for British trade in 
Europe. His action in the matters just named, as also in the 
complex affair of the secularizations of clerical domains in 
Germany (February 1803), belongs properly to the history of 
those countries; but we may here note that, even before the 
signature of the .peace of Amiens (27th of March 1802), he had 
effected changes in the constitution of the Batavian (Dutch) 
republic, which placed power in the hands of the French party 
and enabled him to keep French troops in the chief Dutch 
fortresses, despite the recently signed treaty of Luneville which 
guaranteed the independence of that republic. His treatment 
of the Italians was equally high-handed. In September 1801 he 
bestowed on the Cisalpine republic a constitution modelled on 
that of France. Next, he summoned the chief men of the Franco- 
phile party in that republic to Lyons in the early days of 1802, 
in order to arrange with them the appointment of the chiefs of 
the executive. It soon appeared that the real aim of the meeting 
was to make Bonaparte president. He let it be known that 
he strongly disapproved of their proposal to elect Count Melzi, 
the Italian statesman most suitable for the post; and a hint 
given by Talleyrand showed the reason for his disapproval. 
The deputies thereupon elected Bonaparte. As for the neighbour- 
ing land, Piedmont, it was already French in all but name. On 
the 21st of April 1801 he issued a decree which constituted 
Piedmont as a military district dependent on France; for 
various reasons he postponed the final act of incorporation to 
the 21 st of September 1802. The Genoese republic a little earlier 
underwent at his hand changes which made its doge all-powerful 
in local affairs, but a mere puppet in the hands of Bonaparte. 
In central Italy the influence of the First Consul was paramount; 
for in 1 801 he transformed the grand duchy of Tuscany into the 
kingdom of Etruria for the duke of Parma; and, seeing that that 
promotion added lustre to the fortunes of the duchess of Parma 
(a Spanish infanta), Spain consented lamely enough to the cession 
of Louisiana to France. The effect of these extraordinary 
changes, then, was the carrying out of Napoleonic satrapies in 
the north and centre of Italy in a way utterly inconsistent with 
the treaty of Luneville; and the weakness with which the courts 
of London and Vienna looked on at these singular events con- 
firmed Bonaparte in the belief that he could do what he would 
with neighbouring states. The policy of the French revolutionists 
had been to surround France with free and allied republics. The 
policy of the First Consul was to transform them into tributaries 
which copied with chameleonic fidelity the political fashions he 
himself set at Paris. 

Of all these interventions the most justifiable and beneficent, 
perhaps, was that which related to the Swiss cantons. Whether 
his agents did, or did not, pour oil on the flames of civil strife, 
which he thereupon quenched by his Act of Mediation, 19th of 
February 1803, is a complex question. The settlement which 
he thereby imposed was in many ways excellent; but it was 
dearly purchased by the complete ascendancy of Bonaparte 
in all important affairs, and by the claim for the services of a 
considerable contingent of Swiss troops which he thereafter 
rigorously enforced. 

The re-occupation of Switzerland by French troops in October 
1802 wrought English opinion to a state of indignation against 
the autocrat who was making conquests more quickly in time 
of peace than he had done by his sword; and the irritation 
increased when, on the 29th of January 1803, he publicly stated: 
" It is recognized by Europe that Italy and Holland, as well as 
Switzerland, are at the disposal of France." Another act of 
his at that time made still more strongly for war. On the 30th 
of January he caused the official French paper, the Moniteur, 
to publish in extenso a confidential report sent by Colonel 
Sebastiani describing his so-called commercial mission to the 
Levant. In it there occurred the threatening phrase: " Six 
thousand French would at present be enough to conquer Egypt." 
An equally significant hint, that the Ionian Isles might easily 
be regained by France, further helped to open the eyes of the 
purblind Addington ministry to the resolve of Napoleon to make 
the Mediterranean a French lake. Ministers were also deeply 
concerned at the continued occupation of Holland by French 
troops, which made that country and, therefore, the Cape of 
Good Hope, absolutely dependent on France. They accordingly 
resolved not to give up Malta unless Lord Whitworth, the British 
ambassador at Paris, " received z satisfactory explanation " 
relative to the Sebastiani report. Napoleon's refusal to give this, 
and his complaint that Great Britain had neglected to comply 
with some of the provisions of the treaty of Amiens, brought 
Anglo-French relations to an acute phase. By great dexterity 
he succeeded in turning public attention almost solely to the 
fact that Britain had not evacuated Malta. This is probably 
the sense in which we may interpret his tirade against Lord 
Whit worth at the diplomatic circle on the 13th of March. While 
not using threats of personal violence, as was generally reported 
at the time, his language was threatening and offensive. Annoyed 
by Whitworth's imperturbable demeanour, he ended with these 
words: " You must respect treaties, then: woe to those who do 
not respect treaties. They shall answer for it to all Europe." 
The news of the strengthening of the British army and navy 
lately announced in the king's speech had perhaps annoyed him; 
but seeing that his outbursts of passion were nearly always the 
result of calculation — he once stated, pointing to his chin, that 
temper only mounted that high with him — his design, doubtless, 
was to set men everywhere talking about the perfidy of Albion. 
If so, he succeeded. His own violations of the treaties of Lun6ville 
and Amiens were overlooked; and in particular men forgot 
that the weakening of the Knights of St John by the recent 
confiscation of their lands in France and Spain, and the pro- 
tracted delay of Russia and Prussia to guarantee their tenure 
of power in Malta, furnished England with good reasons for 
keeping her hold on that island. On the 4th of April the 
Addington cabinet made proposals with a view to compensation. 
In return for the great accessions of power to France since the 
treaty of Amiens (Elba, it may be noted, was annexed in August 
1802) Great Britain was to retain Malta for ten years and to 
acquire the small island of Lampedusa in perpetuity. French 
troops were also required to withdraw from Holland and Switzer- 
land, and thus fulfil the terms of the treaty of Luneville. Despite 
the urgent efforts of Joseph Bonaparte and Talleyrand to bend 
the First Consul, he refused to listen to these proposals. Finally, 
on the 7th of May, the British government sent a secret offer 
to withdraw from Malta as soon as the French evacuated Holland. 
To this also Napoleon demurred. The rupture, therefore, took 
place in the middle of May; and on a flimsy pretext the First 
Consul ordered the detention in France of all English persons. 
The reasons for his annoyance are now well known. It is 
certain that he was preparing to renew the struggle for the 
mastery of the seas and of the Orient, which must break out 
if he held to his present resolve to found a great colonial empire. 
But he needed time in order to build a navy and to prepare for 
the execution of the schemes for the overthrow of the British 
power in India, which he had lately outlined to General Decaen, 
the new governor of the French possessions in that land. The 
sailing of Decaen 's squadron early in March 1803 had alarmed 
the British ministers and doubtless confirmed their resolve to 
have the question of peace or war settled speedily. Whitworth 
also warned them on the 20th of April that " the chief motives 
for delay are that they (the French) are totally unprepared for a 
naval war." This was quite correct. Napoleon wished to post- 
pone the rupture for fully eighteen months, as is shown by his 
secret instructions to Decaen. The British government did not 
know the whole truth; but, knowing the character of Napoleon, 
it saw that peace was as dangerous as war. In any case, it sent 
the proposals of the 4th of April in order to test the sincerity of 
his recent offer of compensation to England. He refused them, 
mainly, it would seem, because he could not believe that the 
Addington ministry could be firm; and in his rage at the dis- 
covery of his error he revenged himself ignobly on British 
tourists and traders in France. 

_ He now threw all his energies into the task of marshalling the 
forces of France and his vassal states for the overthrow of 
" perfidious Albion." Naval preparations went on apace at 
all the dockyards, and numbers of flat-bottomed boats were 
built or repaired at the northern harbours. Disregarding the 
neutrality of the Germanic System, Napoleon sent a strong 
French corps to overrun Hanover, while he despatched General 
Gouvion St Cyr to occupy Taranto and other dominating 
positions in the south-east of the kingdom of Naples. Exactions 
at the expense of Hanover and Naples helped to lighten the 
burdens of French finance; Napoleon's sale of Louisiana to 
the United States early in 1803 for 60,000,000 francs brought 
further relief to the French treasury; and by pressing hard on 
his ally, Spain, he compelled her to exchange the armed help 
which he had a right to claim, for an annual suhsidy of £2,880,000. 
Through Spain he then threatened Portugal with extinction 
unless she too paid a heavy subsidy, a demand with which the 
court of Lisbon was fain to comply. 

Thus the first months of the war served to differentiate the 
two belligerents. England made short work of the French 
squadrons and colonies, particularly in the West Indies, while 
Napoleon became more than ever the master of central and 
southern Europe. The whole course of the war was to emphasize 
this distinction between the Sea Power and the Land Power; 
and in this fact lay the source of Napoleon's ascendancy in France 
and neighbouring lands, as also of his final overthrow. 

Napoleon's utter disregard of the neutrality of neighbouring 
states was soon to be revealed in the course of a royalist plot 
which helped him to the imperial title. Georges Cadoudal, 
General Pichegru and other devoted royalists had concocted 
with the comte d'Artois (afterwards Charles X. of France) in 
London a scheme for the kidnapping (or more probably the 
murder) of the First Consul. The French police certainly knew 
of the plot, allowed the conspirators to come to Paris, arrested 
them there, and also on the 16th of February 1804 General 
Moreau, with whom Pichegru had two or three secret conferences. 
This was much; for Moreau, though indolent and incapable in 
political affairs, was still immensely popular in the army (always 
more republican than the civilians) and might conceivably head 
a republican movement against the autocrat. But far more was 
to follow. Failing through his police to lure the comte d'Artois 
to land in Normandy, Napoleon pounced on a scion of the House 
of Bourbon who was within his reach. The young due d'Enghien 
was then residing at Ettenheim in Baden near the bank of the 
Rhine. He had served in the army of his grandfather, the prince 
of Conde, during the recent war; and Bonaparte believed for 
a time that he was an accomplice to the Cadoudal-Pichegru plot. 
He therefore sent orders to have him seized by French soldiers 
and brought to Vincennes near Paris. The order was skilfully 
obeyed, and the prince was hurried before a court-martial hastily 
summoned at that castle. Before they passed the verdict, 
Napoleon came to see that his victim was innocent of any 
participation in the plot. Nevertheless he was executed (21st 
of March 1804). It is noteworthy that though Napoleon at 
times sought to shift the responsibility for this deed on Talleyrand 
or Savary, yet during his voyage to St Helena, as also in his will, 
he frankly avowed his responsibility for it and asserted that in 
the like circumstances he would do the same again. 

The horror aroused by this crime did not long deaden the feeling, 
at least in official circles, that something must be done to intro- 
duce the principle of heredity, as the surest means of counteract- 
ing the aims of conspirators. The senate, as usual, took the 
lead in suggesting some such change in the constitution; and 
it besought Napoleon " to complete his work by rendering it, like 
his glory, immortal." Other official addresses of the same 
general tenour flowed in; and even the trihunate showed its 
docility by proposing that the imperial dignity should be declared 
hereditary in the family of Bonaparte (3rd of May). Napoleon 
thereupon invited the senate to " make known to him its thoughts 
completely." The senate and the tribunate each appointed a 
commission to deal with the matter, with the result which every 
one foresaw. Carnot alone in the tribunate protested against 
the measure. The other councils adopted it almost unanimously. 
The S mains Consultum of the 18th of May 1804 awarded to 
Napoleon the title of emperor, the succession (in case he had no 
heir) devolving in turn upon the descendants of Joseph and 
Louis Bonaparte (Lucien and Jerome were for the present ex- 
cluded from the succession owing to their having contracted 
marriages displeasing to Napoleon). In a plebiscite taken on the 
subject of the imperial title and the law of succession, there were 
3,572,329 affirmative votes and only 2560 negatives. In this vote 
lay the justification of the acts of the First Consul and the pledge 
for the greatness of the emperor Napoleon. The republicans 
in nearly every case voted for him: and it is significant of the 
curious trend of French thought that the new imperial con- 
stitution of the 18th of May 1804 opened with the words: 
" The government of the Republic is confided to an emperor, 
who takes the title Emperor of the French." 

The changes brought about by this constitution were mainly 
titular. Napoleon's powers as First Consul for Life were^ so wide 
as to render much extension both superfluous and impossible; but 
we may note here that the senate now gained a further accession 
of authority at the expense of the two legislative bodies: and 
practically legislation rested with the emperor, who sent his decrees 
10 the senate to be registered as senatus consulta. Napoleon's chief 
aversion, the tribunate, was also divided into three sections, dealing 
with legislation, home affairs and finance — a division which preluded 
its entire suppression in 1807. More important were the titular 
changes Napoleon, as we have seen, did not venture to create an 
order of nobility until 1808, but he at once established an imperial 
hierarchy. First came the French princes, namely, the brothers of 
the emperor; six grand imperial dignities were also instituted, viz. 
those of the grand elector (Joseph Bonaparte), arch-chancellor of the 
empire (CambacSr&s), arch-chancellor of state (Eup^ne de Beau- 
harnais), arch-treasurer (Lebrun), constable (Louis Bonaparte), 
grand admiral (Murat). These six formed the emperor's grand 
council. Next came the marshals, namely, Berthier, Murat, Mass^na, 
Augereau, Lannes, Jourdan, Ney, Soult, Brune, Davout, Bessieres, 
Moncey, Mortier and Bernadotte. Four generals — Kellermann, 
Lefebvre, P£rignon, Serrurier — received the titles of honorary- 
marshals. Next came dignities of a slightly lower rank, such as 
those of grand almoner (Fesch), grand marshal of the palace (Duroc), 
grand chamberlain (Talleyrand), grand master of the horse (Caulain- 
court), grand huntsman (Berthier), grand master of ceremonies 
(S6gur). These with a host of lesser dignities built up the imperial 
hierarchy and enabled the court quickly to develop on the lines of 
the old monarchy, so far as rules of etiquette and self-conscious 
efforts could reproduce the courtly graces of the ancien regime. 

Meanwhile Napoleon was triumphing overthe last of the republican 
generals. Moreau's trial for treason promised to end with an ac- 
quittal; but the emperor brought severe pressure to bear on the 
judges (one of whom he dismissed), with the result that the general 
was declared guilty of participating in the royalist plot. Thereupon 
Napoleon, in order to grace the new rSgime by an act of clemency, 
pardoned Moreau, it being understood that he must leave France. 
He left immediately for the United States. Sentence of death was 
passed on the royalist conspirators. On Josephine's entreaties, the 
emperor commuted the sentence for eight of the well-connected men 
among them ; Cadoudal and others of lower extraction were executed 
on the 24th of June. The brave Breton peasant thus summed up 
the results of his plot: " We meant to giveFrance a king and we 
have given her an emperor." The mot was literally true. Victories 
in the field were not more effective in consolidating Napoleon's 
power than were his own coups d'&tat and the supremely skilful use 
which he made of conspiracies directed against him. He showed his 
sense of the value of Fouch6's services in exploiting the royalist 
plot of 1803-1804 by reconstituting the ministry of police and bestow- 
ing it upon him. Thenceforth plots were few. Would-be plotters 
remained quiet from sheer terror of his power and ability, or from a 
conviction that conspiracies redounded to his advantage. 

Napcleon was now able by degrees to dispense with all re- 
publican forms (the last to go was the Republican Calendar, 
which ceased on the 1st of January 1806), and the scene at the 
coronation in Notre Dame on the 2nd of December 1804 was 
frankly imperial in splendour and in the egotism which led 
Napoleon to wave aside the pope, Pius VII., at the supreme 
moment and ciown himself. It is worthy of note that Josephine 
then won a triumph over Joseph Bonaparte and his sisters, 
who had been intriguing to effect a divorce. Napoleon, though 
he did not bar the door absolutely against such a proceeding, 
granted her her heart's desire by secretly going through a religious 
ceremony on the evening before the coronation. It was performed 
by Fesch, now a cardinal; but Napoleon could afterwards urge 
the claim that all the legal formalities had not teen complied 
with; and the motive for the marriage may probably be found 
in the refusal of the pope to appear at the coronation unless the 
former civil contract was replaced by the religious rite. 

As happened at every stage of Napoleon's advancement, 
the states tributary to France underwent changes corresponding 
to those occurring at Paris. The most important of these was 
the erection of monarchy in North Italy. The Italian repuhlic 
(formerly the Cisalpine republic) became the kingdom of Italy. 
At first Napoleon desired to endow Joseph, or, on his refusal, 
Louis, with the crown of the new kingdom. They, however, 
refused to place themselves out of the line of direct succession 
in France, as Napoleon required, in case they accepted this new 
dignity. Finally, he resolved to take the title himself. The 
obsequious authorities at Milan at once furthered his design bv 
sending an address to him, by requesting the establishment of 
royalty, and on the 15th of March 1805 by offering the crown to 
him. On the 26th of May he crowned himself in the cathedral 
at Milan with the iron crown of the old Lombard kings, amidst 
surroundings of the utmost splendour. On the 7th of June 
he issued a decree conferring the dignity of viceroy on Eugene de 
Beauharnais,his stepson; but everything showed that Napoleon's 
will was to be law; and the great powers at once saw that 
Napoleon's promise to keep the crowns of France and Italy separate 
was meaningless. The matter was of international importance; 
for by the treaty of Luneville (February 1801) he had bound 
himself to respect the independence of the two republics of North 
Italy, the Cisalpine and the Ligurian. The defiance to Austria 
was emphasized when, on the 4th of June, he promised a deputa- 
tion from Genoa that he would grant their request (prompted 
by his agents) of incorporating the Genoese (or Ligurian) republic 
in the French empire. In the same month he erected the re- 
public of Lucca into a principality for Bacciochi and his consort, 
Elisa Bonaparte. 

These actions proclaimed so unmistakably Napoleon's in- 
tention of making Italy an annexe of France as to convince 
Francis of Austria and Alexander of Russia that war with him 
was inevitable. The tsar, as protector of the Germanic System, 
had already been so annoyed by the seizure of the due d'Enghien 
on German territory, and by other high-handed actions against 
the Hanse cities, as to recall his ambassador from Paris. 
Napoleon showed his indifference to the opinion of the tsar by 
ordering the seizure of the British envoy at Hamburg, Sir George 
Rumbold (24th of October); but set him free on the remonstrance 
of the king of Prussia, with whom he then desired to remain on 
friendly terms. Nevertheless, the general trend of his policy 
was such as powerfully to help on the formation of the Third 
Coalition against France — a compact which Pitt (who returned 
to power in May 1804) had found it very difficult to arrange. 
Disputes with Russia respecting Malta and the British maritime 
code kept the two states apart for nearly a year; and Austria 
was too timid to move. But Napoleon's actions, especially the 
annexation of Genoa, at last brought the three powers to accord, 
with the general aim of re-establishing the status quo ante in Ger- 
many, Holland, Switzerland and Italy, or, in short, of restoring 
the balance of power which Napoleon had completely upset. 

Military affairs in this period are dealt with under Napoleonic 
Campaigns; but it may be noted here that during the anxious 
days which Napoleon spent at the camp of Boulogne in the 
second and third weeks of August 1805, uncertain whether to 
risk all in an attack on England in case Villeneuve should arrive, 
or to turn the Grand Army against Austria, the only step which 
he took to avert a continental war was the despatch of General 
Duroc to Berlin to offer Hanover to Prussia on consideration of 
her framing a close alliance with France. It was very unlikely 
that that peace-loving Court would take up arms against its 
powerful neighbours on behalf of Napoleon, and his proceedings 
in the previous months had been so recklessly provocative as 
to arouse doubts whether he intended to invade England and 
did not welcome the outbreak of a continental war. But in the 
case of a man so intensely ambitious, determined and egoistic as 
Napoleon, a decision on this interesting question is hazardous. 
Little reliance can be placed on his subsequent statements (as, 
for instance, to Metternich in 1810) that the huge preparations 
at Boulogne and the long naval campaign of Villeneuve were a 
mere ruse whereby to lure the Austrians into a premature 
declaration of war. It is, however, highly probable that he meant 
to strike at London if naval affairs went well, but that he was 
glad to have at hand an alternative which would shroud a 
maritime failure under military laurels. If so, he succeeded. 
His habit was, as he said, faire son theme en deux faqons, and he 
now took the second alternative. On or about the 25th-27th 
of August he resolved to strike at Austria. He did so with 
masterly skill and swiftness, and the triumphs of Ulm and 
Austerlitz hid from view the disaster of Trafalgar; and the only 
official reference to that crushing defeat was couched in these 
terms: " Storms caused us to lose some ships of the line after a 
fight imprudently engaged " (speech to the Legislature, 2nd of 
March 1806). 

The glamour of Austerlitz had very naturally dazzled all 
Frenchmen. Its results indeed were not only astounding at the 
time, but were such as to lead up to a new cycle of wars. By 
the peace of Presburg (26th of December 1805) Napoleon com- 
pelled Austria to recognize all the recent changes in Italy, and 
further to cede Venetia, Istria and Dalmatia to the new kingdom 
of Italy. The Swabian lands of the Habsburgs went to the South 
German states (allies of Napoleon), while Bavaria also received 
Tirol and Vorarlberg. The Electors of Bavaria and Wurttem- 
berg were recognized as kings. 

Nor was this all. Napoleon pressed almost equally hard upon 
Prussia. That power had been on the point of offering her 
armed mediation in revenge for his violation of her territory of 
Anspach; but she was fain to accept the terms which he offered 
at the sword's point. When modified in February 1806, after 
Prussia's demobilization, they comprised the occupation of 
Hanover by Prussia, with the proviso, however, that she should 
exclude British ships and goods from the whole of the north- 
west coast of Germany. To this demand (the real commence- 
ment of the " Continental System") the Berlin government had 
to accede, though at the cost of a naval war with England, and the 
ruin of its maritime trade. Anspach and Bayreuth were also 
to be handed over to Bavaria, it now being the aim of Napoleon 
to aggrandize the South German princes who had fought on his 
side in the late war. In order to strengthen this compact, he 
arranged a marriage between the daughter of the king of Bavaria 
and Eugene Beauharnais; and he united the daughter of the 
Elector of Wiirttemberg in marriage to Jerome Bonaparte, who 
had now divorced his wife, formerly Miss Paterson of Baltimore, 
at his brother's behests. Stephanie de Beauharnais, niece of 
Josephine, was also betrothed to the son of the duke (now grand 
duke) of Baden. By these alliances the new Charlemagne 
seemed to have founded his supremacy in South Germany on 
sure foundations. 

Equally striking was his success in Italy. The Bourbons of 
Naples had broken their treaty engagements with Napoleon, 
though in this matter they were perhaps as much sinned against 
as sinning. After Austerlitz the conqueror fulminated against 
them, and sent southwards a strong column which compelled 
an Anglo-Russian force to sail away and brought about the flight 
of the Bourbons to Sicily (February 1806). This event opened 
a new and curious chapter in the history of Europe, that of the 
fortunes of the Napottonides. True to his Corsican instinct of 
attachment to the family, and contempt for legal and dynastic 
claims, he now began to plant his brothers and other relatives 
in what had been republics established by the French Jacobins. 
Eugene Beauharnais had been established at Milan. Joseph 
Bonaparte was now advised to take the throne of Naples, and 
without any undue haggling as to terms, for "those who will 
not rise with me shall no longer be of my family. I am making 
a family of kings attached to my federative system." At the 
end of March 1806 Joseph became king of the Two Sicilies. A 
little later the emperor bestowed the two papal enclaves of 
Benevento and Ponte-Corvo on Talleyrand and Bernadotte 
respectively, an act which emphasized the hostility which had 
been growing between Napoleon and the papacy. Because 
Tius VII. declined to exclude British goods from the Papal 
States, Napoleon threatened to reduce the pope to the level 
merely of bishop of Rome. He occupied Ancona and seemed 
about to annex the Papal States outright. That doom was 
postponed; but Catholics everywhere saw with pain the harsh 
treatment accorded to a defenceless old man. The prestige 
which the First Consul had gained by the Concordat was now lost 
by the overweening emperor. 



But it was on the banks of the Rhine that the Napoleonic 
system received its most signal developments. The duchy of 
Berg, along with the eastern part of Cleves and other annexes, 
now went to Murat, brother-in-law of Napoleon (March 1806); 
and that melodramatic soldier at once began to round off his 
eastern boundary in a way highly offensive to Prussia. She was 
equally concerned by Napoleon's behaviour in the Dutch Nether- 
lands, where her influence used to be supreme. On the 5th of 
June 1806 the Batavian republic completed its chrysalis-like 
transformations by becoming a kingdom for Louis Bonaparte. 
" Never cease to be a Frenchman " was the pregnant advice 
which he gave to his younger brother in announcing the new 
dignity to him. In that sentence lay the secret of all the dis- 
agreements between the two brothers. Louis resolved to govern 
for the good of his subjects. Napoleon determined that he, like 
all the Bonapartist rulers, should act merely as a Napoleonic 
satrap. They were to be to him what the counts of the marches 
were to Charlemagne, warlike feudatories defending the empire 
or overawing its prospective foes. 

Far more was to follow. On the 17th of July Napoleon signed 
at Paris a decree that reduced to subservience the Germanic 
System, the chaotic weakness of which he had in 1797 foreseen 
to be highly favourable to France. He now grouped together the 
princes of south and central Germany in the Confederation of 
the Rhine, of which he was the protector and practically the ruler 
in all important affairs. The logical outcome of this proceeding 
appeared on the 1st of August, when Napoleon declared that he 
no longer recognized the., existence of the Holy Roman Empire. 
The head of that venerable organism, the emperor Francis II., 
bowed to the inevitable and announced that he thenceforth 
confined himself to his functions as Francis I., hereditary emperor 
of Austria, a title which he had taken just two years previously. 
This tame acquiescence of the House of Habsburg in the re- 
organization of Germany seemed to set the seal on Napoleon's 
work. He controlled all the lands from the Elbe to the Pyrenees, 
and had Spain and Italy at his beck and call. Power such as this 
was never wielded by his prototype, Charlemagne. 

But now came a series of events which transcended all that 
the mind of man had conceived. As the summer of 1806 wore 
on, his policy perceptibly hardened. Negotiations with England 
and Russia served to show the extent of his ambition. Sicily 
he was determined to have, and that too despite of all the efforts 
of the Fox-Grenville cabinet to satisfy him in every other direc- 
tion. In his belief that he could ensnare the courts of London 
and St Petersburg into separate and proportionately disadvan- 
tageous treaties, he overreached himself. The tsar indignantly 
repudiated a treaty which his envoy, Oubril, had been tricked 
into signing at Paris; and the Fox-Grenville cabinet (as also 
its successor) refused to bargain away Sicily. War, therefore, 
went on. What was more, Prussia, finding that Napoleon had 
secretly offered to the British Hanover (that gilded hook by 
which he caught her early in the year), now resolved to avenge 
this, the last of several insults. Napoleon was surprised by the 
news of Prussia's mobilization; he had come to regard her as 
a negligible quantity, and now he found that her unexpected 
sensitiveness on points of honour was about to revivify the 
Third Coalition against France. 

The war which broke out early in October 1806 (sometimes 
known as the war of the Fourth Coalition) ran a course curiously 
like that of 1805 in its main outlines. For Austria we may 
read Prussia; for Ulm, Jena-Auerstadt; for the occupation of 
Vienna, that of Berlin; for Austerlitz, Friedland, which again 
disposed of the belated succour given by Russia. The parallel 
extends even to the secret negotiations; for, if Austria could 
have been induced in May 1 807 to send an army against Napoleon's 
communications, his position would have been fully as dangerous 
as before Austerlitz if Prussia had taken a similar step. Once 
more he triumphed owing to the timidity of the central power 
which had the game in its hands; and the folly which marked 
the Russian tactics at Friedland (14th of June 1807), as at 
Austerlitz, enabled him to close the campaign in a blaze of 
glory and shiver the coalition in pieces. 

Now came an opportunity far greater than that which occurred 
after Austerlitz. The Peace of Presburg was merely continental. 
That of Tilsit was of world-wide importance. But before refer- 
ring to its terms we must note an event which indicated the lines 
on which Napoleon's policy would advance. After occupying 
the Prussian capital he launched against England the famous 
Berlin Decree (21st of November 1806), declaring her coasts 
to be in a state of blockade, and prohibiting all commerce with 
them. No ship coming thence was to be admitted into French 
or allied harbours; ships transgressing the decree were to be 
good prize of war; and British subjects were liable to imprison- 
ment if found in French or allied territories. This decree is 
often called the basis of the Continental System, whereby 
Napoleon proposed to ruin England by ruining her commerce. 
But even before Trafalgar he had begun to strike at that most 
vulnerable form of wealth, as the Jacobins had done before him. 
Nelson's crowning triumph rendered impossible for the present 
all other means of attack on those elusive foes; and Napoleon's 
sense of the importance of that battle may be gauged, not by 
his public utterances on the subject, but by his persistence in 
forcing Prussia to close Hanover and the whole coastline of 
north-west Germany against British goods. That proceeding, 
in February 1806, constitutes the basis of the Continental 
System. The Berlin Decree gave it a wide extension. By 
the mighty blow of Friedland and the astonishing diplomatic 
triumph of Tilsit, the conqueror hoped speedily to overwhelm 
the islanders beneath the mass of the world's opposition. 
Napoleon at Tilsit resembles Polyphemus seeking to destroy 
Ulysses. The crags which he flung at Britannia did indeed 
graze the stern and graze the prow of her craft. 

The triumph won at Friedland marks in several respects the 
climax of Napoleon's career. The opportunity was unique; 
and he now put forth his utmost endeavours to win over to his 
side the conquered but still formidable tsar. In their first inter- 
view, held on a raft in the middle of the river Niemen at Tilsit 
on the 25th of June, the French emperor, by bis mingled strength 
and suppleness of intellect, gained an easy mastery over the 
impressionable young potentate. Partly from fear of a national 
Polish rising which Napoleon held in reserve as a last means of 
coercion, and partly from a subtle resolve to use the French 
alliance as a means of securing rich domains at the expense of 
Turkey, Prussia, Sweden and England, Alexander decided to 
throw over his allies, Prussia and England, and to seize the 
spoils to which the conqueror pointed as the natural sequel of 
a Franco-Russian alliance. Napoleon, therefore, had Prussia 
completely at his mercy; and his conditions to that power bore 
witness to the fact. The prayers of Queen Louisa of Prussia 
failed to bend him from his resolve. He refused even to grant 
her tearful request for Magdeburg. At a later time he reproached 
himself for not having dethroned the Hohenzollerns outright; 
but it is now known that Alexander would have forbidden this 
step, and that he dissuaded Napoleon from withdrawing Silesia 
from the control of the House of Hohenzollern. Even so, Prussia 
was bereft of half of her territories; those west of the river 
Elbe went to swell the domains of Napoleon's vassals or to form 
the new kingdom of Westphalia for Jerome Bonaparte; while 
the spoils which the House of Hohenzollern had won from Poland 
in the second and third partitions were now to form the duchy 
of Warsaw, ruled over by Napoleon's ally, the elector (now 
king) of Saxony. Danzig became nominally a free city, but was 
to be occupied by a French garrison until the peace. The tsar 
acquired a frontier district from Prussia, recognized the changes 
brought about by Napoleon in Germany and Italy, and agreed 
by a secret article that the Cattaro district on the east coast of 
the Adriatic should go to France. Equally important was the 
secret treaty of alliance between France and Russia signed on 
that same day. By it Napoleon brought the tsar to agree to 
make war on England in case that power did not accept the 
tsar's mediation for the conclusion of a general peace. Failing 
the arrival of a favourable reply from London by the 1st of 
December 1807, the tsar would help Napoleon to compel 
Denmark, Sweden and Portugal to close their ports against, and 
make war on, Great Britain. Napoleon also promised to mediate 
between Russia and Turkey in the interests of the former, 
and (in case the Porte refused to accept the proffered terms) 
to help Russia to drive the Turks from Europe, "the city of 
Constantinople and the province of Rumelia alone excepted*" 
This enterprise and the acquisition of Finland from Sweden, 
which Napoleon also dangled before the eyes of the tsar, formed 
the bait which brought that potentate into Napoleon's Continental 
System. Both Russia and Prussia now agreed rigorously to 
exclude British ships and goods from their dominions. 

The terms last named indicate the nature of the aims which 
Napoleon had in view at Tilsit. That compact was not, as has 
often been assumed, merely the means of assuring to Napoleon 
the mastery of the continent and the control of a cohort of kings. 
That eminence he enjoyed before the collision with Prussia 
in the autumn of 1806; and he frequently, and no doubt sincerely, 
expressed contempt of conquests dans cette vieille Europe. 
The three coalitions against France had not produced a single 
warrior worthy of his steel. The treaty of Tilsit may more 
reasonably be looked on as an expedient for piling up enormous 
political resources with a view to the coercion of Great Britain. 
If that end could not be achieved by massing the continental 
states against her in a solid phalanx of commercial war, then 
Napoleon intended to ensure her ruin by that other enterprise 
which he had in view early in 1798 (see his letter of the 23rd of 
February 1798), namely the conquest of the Orient. An expedi- 
tion against India had recently occupied his thoughts, as may 
be seen by the instructions which he issued on the 10th of May 
1807 to General Gardane for his mission to Persia. The Orient 
was, indeed, ever the magnet which attracted him most; and his 
hostility to England may be attributed to his perception that 
she alone stood in the way of his most cherished schemes. The 
treaty of Tilsit, then, far from being merely a European event, 
was an event of the first importance in what may be termed 
the Welt-politik of Napoleon. His confidence that his vastly 
enhanced powers would enable him first to coerce, and there- 
after to overthrow, the British empire may be illustrated by his 
allowing the appearance in 1807 of an official atlas of Australia 
in which about one-third of that continent figures as "Terre 
Napoleon." 

As usually happened in this strife of the land power and the 
sea power, Napoleon's continental policy attained an almost 
complete success, while the naval and oriental schemes which 
he had more nearly at heart utterly miscarried. The continent 
accepted the new development of his System. After some 
diplomatic fencing Russia and Prussia broke with England 
and entered upon what was, officially at least, a state of war 
with her. Further, owing to the carelessness of the Prussian 
negotiator, Napoleon was able to require the exaction of im- 
possibly large sums from that exhausted land, and therefore 
to keep his troops in her chief fortresses. The duchy of Warsaw 
and the fortress of Danzig formed new outworks of his power 
and enabled him to overawe Russia. In home affairs as in 
foreign affairs his actions bespoke the master. On returning 
from Tilsit to Paris he relieved Talleyrand of the ministry of 
foreign affairs, softening the fall by creating him a grand 
dignitary of the empire. The more subservient Champagny 
now became what was virtually the chief clerk in the French 
foreign office; and other changes placed in high station men 
who were remarkable for docility rather than originality and 
power. Napoleon also suppressed the Tribunate; and in the 
year 1808 instituted an order of nobility. During the course 
of a tour in Italy in December 1807 he gave a sharp turn to that 
world-compelling screw, the Continental System. By the Milan 
Decree of the 17th of December 1807, he ordained that every 
ship which submitted to the right of search now claimed by 
Great Britain would be considered a lawful prize. The imperious 
terms in which this decree was couched and its misleading 
reference to the British maritime code showed that Napoleon 
believed in the imminent collapse of his sole remaining enemy. 
This was natural. Britain, it was true, acting on the initiative 
of George Canning, had seized the Danish fleet, thus forestalling 
an action which Napoleon certainly contemplated; but on the 
other hand Denmark now allied herself with him; and while 
in Lombardy he heard of the triumphant entry of his. troops 
into Lisbon — an event which seemed to prelude his domination 
in the Iberian Peninsula and thereafter in the Mediterranean. 

The occupation of Lisbon, which led on to Napoleon's inter- 
vention in Spanish affairs, resulted naturally from the treaty 
of Tilsit. The coercion of England's oldest ally had long been 
one of Napoleon's most cherished aims, and was expressly pro- 
vided for in that compact. To this scheme he turned with a 
zeal whetted by consciousness of his failure respecting the Danish 
fleet. On the 27th of October 1807 he signed with a Spanish 
envoy at Fontainebleau a secret convention with a view to the 
partitioning of Portugal between France and Spain. Another 
convention of the same date allowed him to send 28,000 French 
troops into Spain for the occupation of Portugal, an enterprise 
in which a large Spanish force was to help them; 40,000 French 
troops were to be cantonned at Bayonne to support the first 
corps. Seeing that Godoy, the all-powerful minister at Madrid, 
had given mortal offence to Napoleon early in the Prussian 
campaign of 1806 by calling on Spain to arm on behalf of her 
independence, it passes belief how he could have placed his 
country at the mercy of Napoleon at the end of the year 1807. 
The emperor, however, successfully gilded the hook by awarding 
Algarve, the southern province of Portugal, to Godoy. The north 
of Portugal was to go to the widow of the king of Etruria (a 
Spanish Infanta); her realm now passing into the hands of 
Napoleon. Thus Portugal in 1807, like Venice in 1797, was to 
provide the means for widely extending the operations of his 
statecraft. 

The natural result followed. Portugal was easily overrun 
by the allies; but Junot's utmost efforts failed to secure the 
Portuguese fleet, which, under the protection of a British 
squadron, sailed away to Brazil with the royal family, the 
ministers and chief grandees of the realm. In other respects 
all went well. The French reinforcements which entered 
Spain managed to secure some of the strongholds of the northern 
provinces; and the disgraceful feuds in the royal family left 
the country practically at the emperor's mercy. 

The situation was such as to tempt Napoleon on to an under- 
taking on which he had probably set his heart in the autumn 
of 1806, that of dethroning the Spanish Bourbons and of replacing 
them by a Bonaparte. Looking at the surface of the life of 
Spain, he might well believe in its decay. The king, Charles IV., 
looked on helplessly at the ruin wrought by the subservience of 
his kingdom to France since 1796, and he was seemingly blind 
to the criminal intrigues between his queen and the prime minister 
Godoy. His senile spite vented itself on his son Ferdinand, 
whose opposition to the all-powerful favourite procured for him 
hatred at the palace and esteem everywhere else. Latterly 
the prince had fallen into disgrace for proposing, without the 
knowledge of Charles IV., to ally himself with a Bonaparte 
princess. Here, then, were all the conditions which favoured 
Napoleon's intervention. He allowed the prince to hope for 
such a union, and thus enhanced the popularity of the French 
party at Madrid. Godoy, having the prospect of the Algarve 
before him, likewise offered no opposition to the advance of 
Napoleon's troops to the capital; and so it came about that 
Murat, named by Napoleon his Lieutenant in Spain, was able 
to enter Madrid in force and without opposition from that 
usually clannish populace. The course of events, and especially 
the anger of the people, now began to terrify Charles IV., the 
queen and Godoy. They prepared for flight to America — a 
step which Napoleon took care to prevent; and a popular 
outbreak at Aranjuez decided the king then and there to abdicate 
(19th of March 1808). Murat, now acting very warily in the 
hope of gaining the crown of Spain for himself, refused to 
recognize this act as binding, still more so the accession of 
Ferdinand VII. Charles thereupon declared his abdication to 
have been made under duress and therefore null and void. 
The young king, still hoping for Napoleon's favour, now responded 
to the suggestion, forwarded by Savary, that an interview with 
the emperor would clear up the situation. The same prospect 
was held out to Charles IV., the queen and Godoy, with the 
result that the rivals for the throne proceeded to the north of 
Spain to meet the arbiter of their destinies. Napoleon journeyed 
to Bayonne and remained there. The claimants, each not know- 
ing of the movements of the other, crossed the Pyrenees, and 
Ferdinand on his arrival at Bayonne found himself to be virtually 
a prisoner in the hands of the emperor. Napoleon had little 
difficulty in disposing of the father, whose rage against his son 
blunted his senses in every other direction. As for Ferdinand, 
the emperor, on hearing the news of a rising in Madrid on the 
2nd of May, overwhelmed him with threats, until he resigned 
the crown into the hands of his father, who had already bargained 
it away to Napoleon in return for a pension (5th of May 1808). 
Princely abodes in France and annuities (the latter to be paid 
by Spain) — such was the price at which Napoleon bought the 
crown of Spain and the Indies. Naturally nothing more was 
heard of the partition of Portugal. According to outward ap- 
pearance nothing was wanting to complete the emperor's 
triumph. He is said to have remarked with an oath after Jena 
that he would make the Spanish Bourbons pay for their recent 
bellicose proclamation. If the story is correct, his acts at 
Bayonne showed once more his custom of biding his time in 
order to take an overwhelming revenge. That the son of a 
Corsican notary should have been able to dispose of the Spanish 
Bourbons in this contemptuously easy way is one of the marvels 
of history. 

But even in this crowning triumph the cramping egotism 
of his nature — a mental vice which now grew on him rapidly 
— fatally narrowed his outlook and led him to commit an irre- 
trievable blunder. In his contempt for the rulers of Spain he 
forgot the Spanish people. In all the genuine letters of the 
spring of 1808 — that of March 29th to Murat, no. 13,696 of the 
Correspondence, is acknowledged to be a forgery — there is not a 
sign that he regarded the Spaniards as of any account. On the 
27th of March he offered the crown of Spain to his brother Louis, 
king of Holland, in these terms: " The climate of Holland does 
not suit you; besides Holland can never rise from its ruins. 
I think of you for the throne of Spain. You will be the sovereign 
of a generous nation of eleven millions of men and of important 
colonies." On Louis declining the honour, it devolved on 
Joseph, king of Naples, who vacated that throne for the benefit 
of Murat — a source of disappointment and annoyance to both. 
The emperor pushed on his schemes regardless of everything. 
The first signs of the rising ferment in Spain were wasted on him. 
He believed that the arrival of so benevolent a king as Joseph, 
and the promulgation of a number of useful reforms based on 
those of the French Revolution, would soothe any passing 
irritation. If not, then his troops could deal with it as Murat 
had dealt with the men of Madrid on the 2nd of May. He, 
therefore, pressed on the march of a corps of French and Swiss 
troops under Dupont towards Cadiz, in order to take possession 
of the French sail of the line, five in number, which had been 
in that harbour since Trafalgar. The importance which he 
then assigned to naval affairs appears in many letters of the 
months May to June 1808. He intended that Spain should 
very soon have ready twenty-eight sail of the line — " ce qui est 
certes bien peu de chose " — so as to drive away the British 
squadrons, and then he would strike " de grands coups " in 
the autumn. Evidently then the Spanish dockyards and warships 
(when vigorously organized) were to count for much in the 
schemes for assuring complete supremacy in the Mediterranean 
and the ultimate overthrow of the British and Turkish empires, 
which he then had closely at heart. 

The Spanish rising of May-June 1808 ruined these plans 
irretrievably. The men of Cadiz compelled the French warships 
to surrender, and the levies of Andalusia, closing around Dupont, 
compelled him and some 23,000 men to lay down their arms 
at Baylen (23rd of July). This disaster, the most serious suffered 
by the French since Rossbach, sent a thrill through the Napoleonic 
vassal states and aroused in Napoleon transports of anger 
against Dupont. " Everything is connected with this event," 
he wrote on the 2nd of August, " Germany, Poland, Italy." 
Indeed, along with other serious checks in Spain, which involved 
the conquest of that land, it cut through the wide meshes of his 
policy both in Levantine, Central European and commercial 
affairs. The partition of Turkey had to be postponed; the 
financial collapse of England could not be expected now that 
she framed an alliance with the Spanish patriots and had their 
markets and those of their colonies opened to her ; and the 
discussions with the tsar Alexander, which had not gone quite 
smoothly, now took a decidedly unfavourable turn. The tsar 
saw his chance of improving on the terms arranged at Tilsit; 
and obviously Napoleon could not begin the conquest of Spain 
until he felt sure of the conduct of his nominal ally. Still worse 
was the prospect when Sir Arthur Wellesley with a British force 
landed in Portugal, gained the battle of Vimiero (21st of August), 
and brought the French commander, Junot, by the so-called 
convention of Cintra, to agree to the evacuation of the country 
by all the French troops. The sea power thus gained what had 
all along been wanting, a sure basis for the exercise of its force 
against the land power, Napoleon. Still more important, perhaps, 
was the change in moral which the Spanish rising brought about. 
Napoleon's perfidy at Bayonne was so flagrant as to strip from 
him the mask of a champion of popular liberty which had 
previously been of priceless worth. Now he stood forth to the 
world as an unscrupulous aggressor; moral force, previously 
marshalled on the side of France, now began to pass to the side of 
his opponents. The value of that unseen ally he well knew: 
" Once again, let me tell you," he wrote to General Clarke on 
the 10th of October 1809, " in war moral and opinion are more 
than half of the reality." 

Such were the discouraging conditions which weighed him 
down at the time of the interview with the tsar at Erfurt 
(September 27th-October 12th, 1808). That event was so 
important as to require some preliminary explanation. For 
some five months past the two emperors had been exchanging 
their views as to the future of the world. Stated briefly they 
were these. Napoleon desired to press on the partition of Prussia, 
Alexander that of Turkey. The tsar, however, was determined 
to save Prussia if he could; and Napoleon after the first disasters 
in Spain saw it to be impossible to uproot the Hohenzollerns; 
while it was clearly to his interest to postpone the partition of 
Turkey until he had conquered Spain and Sicily. Austria 
meanwhile had begun to arm as a precautionary measure; 
and Napoleon, shortly after his return from Bayonne to Paris, 
publicly declared that, if her preparations went on, he would 
wage against her a war of extermination. The threat naturally 
did not tend to reassure statesmen at Vienna; and trie tsar 
now resolved to prevent the total wreck of the European system 
by screening the House of Habsburg from the wrath of his ally. 
For the present Napoleon's ire fell upon Prussia. A letter written 
by the Prussian statesman, Baron vom Stein, had fallen into the 
hands of the French and revealed to the emperor the ferment 
produced in Germany by news of the French reverses in Spain. 
In that letter Stein urged the need of a national rising of the 
Germans similar to that of the Spaniards, when the inevitable 
struggle ensued between Napoleon and Austria. The revenge of 
the autocrat was characteristic. Besides driving Stein from 
office, he compelled Prussia to sign a convention(8th of September) 
for the payment to France of a sum of 140,000,000 francs, and 
for the limitation of the Prussian army to 42,000 men. 

Apart from this advantage, placed in his hands by the imprud- 
ence of Stein, Napoleon was heavily handicapped at the Erfurt 
interview. In vain did he seek to dazzle the tsar by assembling 
about him the vassal kings and princes of Germany; in vain did 
he exercise all the intellectual gifts which had captivated the 
tsar at Tilsit; in vain did he conjure up visions of the future 
conquest of the Orient; external display, diplomatic finesse, 
varied by one or two outbursts of calculated violence — all was 
useless. The situation now was utterly different from that 
which obtained at Tilsit. Alexander had succeeded in pacifying 
Finland, and his troops held the Danubian provinces of Turkey — 
a pledge, as it seemed, for the future conquest of Constantinople. 

Napoleon, on the other hand, had utterly failed in his Spanish 
enterprise; and the tsar felt sure that his rival must soon with- 
draw French garrisons from the fortresses of the Oder to the 
frontier of Spain. These facts, and not, as has often been 
assumed, the treachery of Talleyrand, decided Alexander to 
assume at Erfurt an attitude of jealous reserve. He refused to 
join Napoleon in any proposal for the coercion of Austria or the 
limitation of her armaments. Finally he agreed to join his ally if 
he (Napoleon) were attacked by the Habsburg power. Napoleon 
on his side succeeded in adjourning the question of the partition 
of Turkey; but he awarded the Danubian provinces and Finland 
to his ally and agreed to withdraw the French garrisons from 
the Prussian fortresses on the Oder. On the 12th of October 
both potentates addressed an appeal to George III. to accord 
peace to the world on the basis of uti possidetis. Canning 
assented, provided that envoys of all the states and peoples 
concerned took part in the negotiations. Whereupon a reply 
came from Paris (28th of November) that the French emperor 
refused to admit the envoys of " the king who reigns in Brazil, 
the king who reigns in Sicily or the king who reigns in Sweden." 
The " Spanish insurgents " were equally placed out of court. 
Clearly, then, Napoleon's desire for peace was conditional 
on his being allowed to dictate terms to the rulers and peoples 
concerned. 

Already he had shown that the sword must decide affairs in 
Spain. After spending a short time in Paris in order to supervise 
the transfer of his forces from Germany to the Pyrenees, he 
journeyed swiftly southwards, burst upon the Spaniards, and 
on the 3rd of December received the surrender of Madrid. There, 
on the iCth of December, he issued a decree (omitted from the 
official Correspondence) declaring le nommi Stein an enemy of 
France and confiscating his property in the lands allied to France. 
The great statesman barely succeeded in escaping to Austria, a 
land in which the hopes of German patriots now centred. En- 
couraged by the sympathy of all patriotic Germans and the newly 
found energy of its own subjects, the House of Habsburg now 
began to prepare for war. Napoleon was then in the midst of 
operations against Sir John Moore, whose masterly march on 
Sahagun (near Valladolid) had thwarted the emperor's plans for 
a general " drive " on to Lisbon. Hoping to punish Moore for 
his boldness, Napoleon struck quickly north at Astorga, but found 
that he was too late to catch his foe. At that town he also heard 
news on the 1st of January 1809, which portended trouble in 
Germany and perhaps also at Paris. Austria was continuing to 
arm; and the emperor perceived that the diplomatic failure at 
Erfurt was now about to entail on him another and more serious 
struggle. His anxiety was increased by news of sinister import 
respecting frequent interviews between those former rivals, 
Talleyrand and Fouche, in which Murat was said to be concerned. 
Handing over the command to Soult, he hurried back to Paris 
to trample on the seeds of sedition and to overwhelm Austria by 
the blows which he showered upon her in the valley of the 
Danube. Sir John Moore and the statesmen of Austria — the 
heroic Stadion at their head — failed in their enterprise; but at 
least they frustrated the determined effort of Napoleon to stamp 
out the national movement in the Iberian Peninsula. Thereafter 
he never entered Spain; and the French operations suffered 
incalculably from the want of one able commander-in-chief. 

In the Danubian campaign of 1809 he succeeded; but the 
stubborn defence of Austria, the heroic efforts of the Tirolese 
and the spasmodic efforts which foreboded a national rising in 
Germany, showed that the whole aspect of affairs was changing? 
even in central Europe, where rulers and peoples had hitherto 
been as wax under the impress of his will. The peoples, formerly 
so apathetic, were now the centre of resistance, and their efforts 
failed owing to the timidity or sluggishness of governments 
and the incompetence of some of their military leaders. The 
failure of the archduke John to arrive in time at Wagram (5th 
of July), the lack of support accorded by the Spaniards to 
Wellesley before and after the battle of Talavera (28th of July), 
and the slowness with which the British government sent forth 
its great armada.against Flushing and Antwerp, a fortnight after 
Austria sued for an armistice from Napoleon, enabled that superb 
organizer to emerge victorious from a most precarious situation. 
The hatred felt for him by Germans found expression in a 
daring attempt to murder him made by a well-bred youth named 
Staps on the 12th of October. 

Two days later Napoleon, by means of unworthy artifices, 
hurried the Austrian plenipotentiaries into signing the treaty of. 
peace at Schonbrunn. The House of Habsburg now ceded 
Salzburg and the Inn-Viertel to Napoleon (for his ally, the king 
of Bavaria); a great portion of the spoils which Austria had torn 
from Poland in 1795 went to the grand duchy of Warsaw, or 
Russia; and the cession of her provinces Carinthia, Carniola 
and Istria to the French empire cut her off from all access to the 
sea. After imposing these harsh terms on his enemy, the con- 
queror might naturally have shown clemency to the Tirolese 
leader, Andreas Hofer; but that brave mountaineer, when 
betrayed by a friend, was sentenced to death at Mantua owing 
to the arrival of a special message to that effect from Napoleon. 

In other quarters he achieved for the present a signal success. 
It was his habit to issue important decrees from the capitals of 
his enemies; and on the 17th of May 1809 he signed at Vienna 
an edict abolishing the temporal power of the pope and annexing 
the Papal States, which the French troops had occupied early 
in the previous year. On the 6th of July 1809 Pius VII. was 
arrested at Rome for presuming to excommunicate the successor 
of Charlemagne, and was deported to Grenoble and later on to 
Savona. The same year witnessed the downfall of Napoleon's 
persistent enemy, Gustavus IV. of Sweden, who was dethroned 
by a military movement (29th of March 1809). His successor, 
Charles XIII., made peace with France on the 6th of January 
1 8 10, and agreed to adopt the provisions of the Continental 
System. The aim in all these changes, it will be observed, was 
to acquire control over the seaboard, or, failing that, the com- 
merce of all European states. 

As happened in the years 1 802-1 803, Napoleon extended his 
" System " as rapidly in time of peace as during war. The year 
1810 saw the crown set to that edifice by the annexations of 
Holland and of the north-west coast of Germany. In both cases 
the operative cause was the same. Neither Louis Bonaparte nor 
German douaniers could be trusted to carry out in all their 
stringency the decrees for the entire exclusion of British commerce 
from those important regions. In the case of King Louis, family 
quarrels embittered the relations between the two brothers; 
but it is clear from Napoleon's letters of November-December 
1809 that he had even then resolved to annex Holland in order 
to gain complete control of its customs and of its naval resources. 
The negotiations which he allowed to go on with England in 
the spring of 1810, mainly respecting the independence of 
Holland, are now known to have been insincere. Fouche, for 
meddling in the negotiations through an agent of his own, was 
promptly disgraced; and, when neither England was moved by 
diplomatic cajolery nor Louis Bonaparte by threats, French 
troops were sent against the Dutch capital. Louis fled from his 
kingdom, and on the 9th of July 18 10 Holland became part of 
the French empire. In the next months Napoleon promulgated 
a series of decrees for effecting the ruin of British commerce, 
and in December .1810 he decreed the annexation of the north- 
west coast of Germany, as also of Canton Valais, to the French 
empire. This* now stretched from Liibeck to the Pyrenees, 
from Brest to Rome; while another arm (only nominally severed 
from the empire by the Napoleonic kingdom of Italy) extended 
down the eastern shore of the Adriatic to Ragusa and Cattaro, 
threatening the Turkish empire with schemes of partition always 
imminent but never achieved. 

. It is time now to notice two important events in the life of the 
emperor, namely his divorce of Josephine and his union with 
Marie Louise of Austria. The former of these had long been 
foreseen. The Bonapartes had intrigued for it with their usual 
persistence, and Napoleon was careful never to make it im- 
possible. His triumph over Austria in 1809, and especially the 
attempt of Staps to murder him, clinched his determination to 
found a dynasty in his own direct line. From Josephine he could 
not expect to have an heir. Accordingly, on his return to Paris 
he caused the news to be broken to her that reasons of state of 
the most urgent kind compelled him to divorce her. An affecting 
scene took place hetween them on the 30th of November 1809; 
but Napoleon, though moved by her distress, remained firm; 
and though the clerics made a difficulty about dissolving the 
religious marriage of the 1st of December 1804, the formalities of 
which were complete save that the parish priest was absent, yet 
the emperor instituted a chancery for the archbishop of Paris, 
with the result that that body pronounced the divorce (January 
1810). Josephine retired to her private abode, Malmaison, where 
her patience and serenity won the admiration of all who saw her. 

Meanwhile the deliberations respecting the choice of her 
successor had already begun. Opinions were divided in the 
emperor's circle between a Russian and an Austrian princess; 
but the marked coolness with which overtures for the hand of 
the tsar's sister were received at St Petersburg, and the skill 
with which Count Metternich, the Austrian chancellor, let it be 
known that a union with the archduchess, Marie Louise, would be 
welcomed at Schonbrunn, helped to decide the matter. The 
reasons why the emperor Francis acquiesced in the marriage 
alliance are well known. Only so could his empire survive. 
A marriage between Napoleon and a Russian princess would have 
implied the permanent subjection of Austria. By the proposed 
step she would weaken the Franco-Russian alliance. But why 
did Napoleon fix his choice on Vienna rather than St Petersburg? 
Mainly, it would seem, because he desired hurriedly to screen 
the refusal, which might at any time be expected from the Russian 
court, under the appearance of a voluntary choice of an Austrian 
archduchess. Further, an alliance with the House of Habsburg 
might be expected to wean the Germans from all thought of 
gaining succour from that quarter. The wedding was celebrated 
first at Vienna by proxy, and at Notre Dame by the emperor in 
person on the 2nd of April. Though based on merely political 
grounds, the union was for the time a happy one. He advised 
his courtiers to marry Germans — " they are the best wives in the 
world, good, naive and fresh as roses." Metternich, on visiting 
Compiegne and Paris, found the emperor thoroughly devoted to 
his bride. Napoleon toldlrim that he was now beginning to live, 
that he had always longed for a home and now at last had one. 
Metternich thereupon wrote to his master: " He (Napoleon) 
has possibly more weaknesses than many other men, and if the 
empress continues to play upon them, as she begins to realize 
the possibility of doing, she can render the greatest services to her- 
self and all Europe." The surmise was too hopeful. Napoleon, 
though he never again worked as he had done, soon freed himself 
from complete dependence on Marie Louise; and he never allowed 
her to intrude into political affairs, for which, indeed, she had not 
the least aptitude. His real concern for her was evinced shortly 
before the birth of their son, the king of Rome,whenhegave orders 
that if the life of both mother and child could not be saved, that 
of the mother should be saved if possible (20th of March 181 1). 

This event seemed to place Napoleon's fortunes on a sure 
basis; but already they were being undermined by events. The 
marriage negotiations of 1809-1810 had somewhat offended the 
emperor Alexander; his resentment increased when, at the close 
of 1810, Napoleon dethroned the duke of Oldenburg, brother-in- 
law of the tsar; and the breach in the Franco-Russian alliance 
widened when the French emperor refused to award fit com- 
pensation to the duke or to give to the Russian government an 
assurance that the kingdom of Poland would never be re- 
constituted. The addition of large territories to the grand 
duchy of Warsaw after the war of 1809 aroused the fears of the 
tsar respecting the Poles; and he regarded all Napoleon's 
actions as inspired by hostility to Russia. He, therefore, despite 
Napoleon's repeated demands, refused to subject his empire 
to the hardships imposed by the Continental System; at the 
close of the year 18 10 he virtually allowed the entry of colonial 
goods (all of which were really British borne) and little by little 
broke away from Napoleon's system. These actions implied war 
between France and Russia, unless Napoleon allowed such 
modifications of his rules {e.g. under the license system) as would 
avert ruin from the trade and finance of Russia; and this he 
refused to do. 

The campaign of 181 2 may, therefore, be considered as result- 
ing, firstly, from the complex and cramping effects of the Conti- 
nental System on a northern land which could not deprive itself 
of colonial goods; secondly, from Napoleon's refusal to mitigate 
the anxiety of Alexander on the Polish question; and thirdly, 
from the annoyance felt by the tsar at the family matters 
noticed above. Napoleon undoubtedly entered on the struggle 
with reluctance. He spoke about it as one that lay in the course 
of destiny. In one sense he was right. If the Continental 
System was inevitable the war with Russia was inevitable. But 
that struggle may more reasonably be ascribed to the rigidity 
with which he carried out his commercial decrees and his diplo- 
macy. He often prided himself on his absolute consistency, 
and we have Chaptal's warrant for the statement that, after the 
time of the Consulate, his habit of following his own opinions 
and rejecting all advice, even when he had asked for it, became 
more and more pronounced. It was so now. He took no heed 
of the warnings uttered by those sage counsellors, Cambaceres 
and Talleyrand, against an invasion of Russia, while "the 
Spanish ulcer " was sapping the strength of the empire at the 
other extremity. He encased himself in fatalism, with the result 
that in two years the mightiest empire reared by man broke under 
the twofold strain. His diplomacy before the war of 1812 was 
less successful than that of Alexander, who skilfully ended his 
quarrel with Turkey and gained over to his side Sweden. That 
state, where Bernadotte had latterly been chosen as crown 
prince, decided to throw off the yoke of the Continental System 
and join England and Russia, gaining from the latter power the 
promise of Norway at the expense of Denmark. 

Napoleon on his side coerced Prussia into an offensive alliance 
and had the support of Austria and the states of the Rhenish 
Confederation. At Dresden he held court for a few days in May 
1812 with Marie Louise: the emperor Francis, the king of 
Prussia and a host of lesser dignitaries were present — a sign of 
the power of the modern Charlemagne. It was the last time that 
he figured as master of the continent. 

The military events of the years 1812-1814 are described under 
Napoleonic Campaigns; and we need therefore note here only 
a few details personal to Napoleon or some considerations which 
influenced his policy. Firstly we may remark that the Austrian 
alliance furnished one of the motives which led him to refrain 
during the campaign of 181 2 from reconstituting the Polish realm 
in its ancient extent. To have done so would have been a mortal 
affront to his ally, Austria. Certainly he needed her support 
during that campaign; but many good judges have inclined 
to the belief that the whole-hearted support of Poles and Lithu- 
anians would have been of still greater value, and that the organi- 
zation of their resources might well have occupied him during the 
winter of 1812-1813, an d would have furnished him with a new 
and advanced base from which to strike at the heart of Russia 
in the early summer of 1813. If the Austrian alliance was chiefly 
responsible for his rejection of that statesmanlike plan, which 
he had before him at Smolensk, it certainly deserves all the hard 
things said of it by the champions of Josephine. 

Another consideration which largely conduced to the disasters 
of the retreat was Napoleon's postponement of any movement 
back from Moscow to the date of October 19th, and this is known 
to have resulted from his conviction that^the tsar would give 
way as he had done at Tilsit. Napoleon's habit of dinging to his 
own preconceptions never received so strange and disastrous an 
illustration as it did during the month spent at Moscow. * On the 
other hand, his desertion of the army on the 5th of December, 
not long after the crossing of the river Beresina, is a thoroughly 
defensible act. He had recently heard of the attempt of a French 
republican general, Malet, to seize the public offices at Paris, a 
quixotic adventure which had come surprisingly near to success 
owing to the assurance with which that officer proclaimed the 
news of the emperor's death in Russia. In such a case, the best 
retort was to return in all haste in order to put more energy into 
the huge centralized organism which the emperor alone could 
work. His rapid return from Spain early in 1809, and now again 
from Lithuania at the close of 1812, gives an instructive glimpse 
into the anxiety which haunted the mind of the autocrat. He 
believed that, imposing as his position was, it rested on the prestige 
won by matchless triumphs. Witness his illuminating state- 
ment to Volney during the Consulate: " Why should France 
fear my ambition? I am but the magistrate of the republic. 
I merely act upon the imagination of the nation. When that 
fails me I shall be nothing, and another will succeed me." 

To this cause we may ascribe his constant efforts to dazzle 
France by grandiose adventures and by swift, unexpected 
movements. But she had now come profoundly to distrust 
him. Her thirst for glory had long since been slaked, and she 
longed for peaceful enjoyment of the civic boons which he had 
conferred upon her in that greatest period of his life, the Con- 
sulate. That the Russian campaign o f 181 2 was the last device 
for assuring The success ot tire'Cofitmental System and tEeTum 
of England was nothing to the great mass of Frenchmen. They 
were weary of a means of pacification which produced endless 
wars abroad and misery at home. True, England had suffered, 
but she was mistress of the seas and had won a score of new 
colonies. France had subjected half the continent; but her 
hold on Spain was weakened by Wellington's blow at Salamanca; 
and now Frenchmen heard that their army in Russia was " dead." 
At home many industries were suffering from the lack of tropical 
and colonial produce: cane sugar sold at five, and coffee at 
seven, shillings the pound. The constant use of chicory for 
coffee, and of woad for indigo, was apt to produce a reaction 
in favour of a humdrum peaceful policy; and yet, by a recent 
imperial decree, Frenchmen had the prospect of seeing the use 
of the new and imperfectly made beet sugar enforced from the 
1 st of January 1813, after which date all cane sugar was^ 
excluded as being of British origin. Shortly "before starting 
for the Russian expedition Napoleon vainly tried to reassure the * 
merchants and financiers of France then face to face with a 
sharp financial crisis. Now at the close of 181 2 matters were 
worse, and Napoleon, on reaching Paris, found the nation 
preoccupied with the task of finding out how many Frenchmen 
had survived the Russian campaign* 

Yet, despite the discontent seething in many quarters, France 
responded to his appeal for troops; but she did so mechanically 
and without hope. Early in January 1813 the senate promised 
that 350,000 conscripts should be enrolled; but 150,000 of them 
were under twenty years of age, and mobile columns had to be 
used to sweep in the recruits, especially in Brittany, the Nether- 
lands and the newly annexed lands of North Germany. 

In the old provinces of France Napoleon's indomitable will over- 
came all difficulties of a material kind. Forces, in experienced but 
devoted, were soon on foot; and he informed his German allies 
that he would allow the Russians to advance into Central 
Germany so as to ensure their destruction. As for the " treason " 
of General York, who had come to terms with the Russians, it 
moved him merely to scorn and contempt. He altogether 
underrated the importance of the national movement in Prussia. 
If Prussian towns " behaved badly " (he wrote on the 4th of 
March), they were to be burnt; Eugene was not to spare even 
Berlin. Prussia (he wrote on the 14th of March) was a weak 
country. She could not put more than 40,000 men in the field 
(the number to which he had limited her in September 1808). 
He therefore heard without dismay at the end of March that 
Prussia had joined Russia in a league in which Sweden was now 
an active participant. 

It was clear that the spiritual forces of the time were also 
slipping out of his grasp. Early in January he sought to come 
to terms with the pope (then virtually a captive at Fontainebleau) 
respecting various questions then in debate concerning the 
Concordat. At first the emperor succeeded in persuading the 
aged pontiff to sign the preliminaries of an agreement, known 
as the " Fontainebleau Concordat " (25th of January 1813); 
but, on its insidious character becoming apparent, Pius VII. 
revoked his consent, as having been given under constraint. 
Nevertheless Napoleon ordered the preliminary agreement to be 
considered as a definitive treaty, and on the 2nd of April gave 
instructions that one of the refractory cardinals should be 
carried off secretly by night from Fontainebleau, while the pontiff 
was to be guarded more closely than before. On these facts 
becoming known, a feeling of pity for the pope became wide- 
spread; and the opinion of the Roman Catholic world gradually 
turned against the emperor while he was fighting to preserve 
his supremacy in Germany. " I am following the course of 
events: I have always marched with them." Such were his 
words uttered shortly before his departure from Paris (15th of 
April). They proved that he misread events and misunderstood 
his own position. 

The course of the ensuing campaigns was to reveal the harden- 
ing of his mental powers. Early in April he sought to gain the 
help of 100,000 Austrian troops by holding out to Francis of 
Austria the prospect of acquiring Silesia from Prussia. The offer 
met with no response, Austria having received from the allies 
vaguely alluring offers that she might arrange matters as she 
desired in Italy and South Germany. Napoleon began to suspect 
his father-in-law, and still more the Austrian chancellor, 
Metternich; but instead of humouring them, he resolved to 
stand firm. The Austrian demands, first presented to him 
on the 1 6th of May, shortly after his victory of Liitzen, were 
(1) the dissolution of the grand duchy of Warsaw, (2) the with- 
drawal of France from the lands of north-west Germany annexed 
in 1810 and (3) the cession to Austria of the Illyrian provinces 
wrested from her in 1809. Other terms were held in reserve 
to be pressed if occasion admitted; but these were aU that were 
put forward at the moment. On this basis Austria was ready to 
offer her armed mediation to the combatants. Napoleon would 
not hear of the terms. " I will not have your armed mediation. 
You are only confusing the whole question. You say you cannot 
act for me; you are strong, then, only against me." This out- 
burst of temper was a grave blunder. His threats alarmed the 
Austrian court. At bottom the emperor Francis, perhaps also 
Metternich, wanted peace, but on terms which the exhaustion 
of the combatants would enable them to dictate. Yet during the 
armistice which ensued (June 4th-July 20th; afterwards pro- 
longed to August 10th) Napoleon did nothing to soothe the 
Viennese government, and that, too, despite the encouragement 
which the allies received from the news of Wellington's victory 
at Vittoria and the entry of Bernadotte with a Swedish con- 
tingent on the scene. Austria now proposed the terms named 
above with the addition that the Confederation of the Rhine 
must be dissolved, and that Prussia should be placed in a position 
as good as that which she held in 1805, that is, before the 
campaign of Jena. On the 27th of June she promised to join 
the allies in case Napoleon should not accept these terms. 

He was now at the crisis of his career. Events had shown 
that, even after losing half a million of men in Russia, he was 
a match for her and Prussia combined. Would he now accept 
the Austrian terms and gain a not disadvantageous peace, for 
which France was yearning? These terms, it should be noted, 
would have kept Napoleon's empire intact except in Hlyria; 
while the peace would have enabled him to reorganize his army 
and recover a host of French prisoners from Russia. His 
signing of the armistice seemed to promise as much. To give 
his enemies a breathing space when they were hard pressed was an 
insane proceeding unless he meant to make x peace. "But there is 
nothing in his words or actions at this time to show that he 
desired peace except on terms which were clearly antiquated. 
His letters breathe the deepest resentment against Austria, 
and show that he burned to chastise her for her " perfidy " 
as soon as his cavalry was reorganized. His actions at this time 
have been ascribed to righteous indignation against Metternich's 
double-dealing; and in a long interview at the Marcolini palace 
at Dresden on the 26th of June he asked the chancellor point 
blank how much money England had given him for his present 
conduct. As for himself he cared little for the life of a million 
of men. He had married the daughter of the emperor: it 
was a mistake, but he would bury the world under the ruins. 
Talk in this Ossian-like vein showed that Napoleon's brain no 
longer worked clearly: it was a victim to his egotism and passion. 
July and the first decade of August came and went, but brought 
no sign of pacification. The emperor Francis made a last effort 
to influence his son-in-law through Marie Louise. It was in vain. 
Nothing could bend that cast iron will. Nothing remained but 
to break it. On the expiration of the armistice at midnight of 
August ioth-nth Austria declared war. 

After the disastrous defeat of Leipzig (17th-! 9th October 
1813), when French domination in Germany and Italy vanished 
like an exhalation, the allies gave Napoleon another opportunity 
to come to terms. The overtures known as the Frankfort terms 
were ostensibly an answer to the request for information which 
Napoleon made at the field of Leipzig. Metternich persuaded 
the tsar and the king of Prussia to make a declaration that the 
allies would leave to Napoleon the " natural boundaries " of 
France — the Rhine, Alps, Pyrenees and Ocean. The main object 
of the Austrian chancellor probably was to let Napoleon once 
more show to the world his perverse obstinacy. If this was his 
aim, he succeeded. Napoleon on his return to St Cloud inveighed 
against his ministers for talking so much about peace and declared 
that he would never give up Holland; France must remain a 
great empire, and not sink to the level of a mere kingdom. He 
would never give up Holland; rather than do that, he would 
cut the dykes and give back that land to the sea. Accordingly 
on the 16th of November he sent a vague and unsatisfactory 
reply to the allies; and though Caulaincourt (who now replaced 
Maret as foreign minister) was on the 2nd of December charged 
to give a general assent to their terms, yet that assent came 
too late. The allies had now withdrawn their offer. Napoleon 
certainly believed that the offer was insincere. Perhaps he was 
right; but even in that case he should surely have accepted 
the offer so as to expose their insincerity. As it was, they were 
able to contrast their moderation with his wrongheadedness, - 
and thereby seek to separate his cause from that of France. 
In this they only partially succeeded. Murat now joined the 
allies; Germany, Switzerland and Holland were lost to Napoledn; 
but when the allies began to invade Alsace and Lorraine, they 
found the French staunch in his support. He was still the 
peasants' emperor. The feelings of the year 1 792 began to revive. * 
Never did Napoleon and France appear more united than in 
the campaign of 18 14. 

Nevertheless it led to his abdication. Once more the allies 
consented to discuss the terms of a general pacification; but 
the discussions at the congress of Chatillon (5th of February- 
19th of March) had no result except to bring to light a proof 
of Napoleon's insincerity. Thereupon' the allies resolved to have 
no more dealings with him. As his chances of success became 
more and more desperate, he ventured on a step whereby he 
hoped to work potently on the pacific desires of the emperor 
Francis. Leaving Paris for the time to its own resources, he 
struck eastwards in the hope of terrifying that potentate and of 
detaching him from the coalition. The move not only failed, 
but it had the fatal effect of uncovering Paris to the northern 
forces of the allies. The surrender of the capital, where he had 
centralized all the governing powers, was a grave disaster. 
Equally fatal was the blow struck at him by the senate, his own 
favoured creation. Convoked by Talleyrand on the 1st of 
April, it pronounced the word abdication on the morrow. For this 
Napoleon cared little, provided that he had the army behind 
him. But now the marshals and generals joined the civilians. 
The defection of Marshal Marmont and his soldiery on the 4th 
of April rendered further thoughts of resistance futile. To 
continue the strife when Wellington was firmly established on 
the line of the Garonne, and Lyons and Bordeaux had hoisted 
the Bourbon fleur de lys y was seen by aU but Napoleon to be sheer 
madness; but it needed the pressure of his marshals in painful 
interviews at Fontainebleau to bring him to reason. 

At last, on the nth of April, he wrote the deed of abdication. 
On that night he is said to have tried to end his life by poison. 
The evidence is not convincing; and certainly his recovery 
was very speedy. On the 20th he bade farewell to his guard 
and set forth from Fontainebleau for Elba, which the powers 
had very reluctantly, and owing to the pressure of the tsar, 
awarded to him as a possession. He was to keep the title ,of 
emperor. Marie Louise was to have the duchy of Parma for 
herself and her son. She did not go with ner consort. Following 
the advice of her father, she repaired to Vienna along , with the 
little king of Rome. As for France, she received the Bourbons, 
along with the old frontiers. 

Meanwhile Napoleon, after narrow escapes from royalist 
mobs in Provence, was conducted in the British cruiser " Un- 
daunted " to Elba. There he spent eleven months in uneasy 
retirement, watching with close interest the course of events in 
France. As he foresaw, the shrinkage of the great empire into 
the realm of old France caused infinite disgust, a feeling fed 
every day by stories of the tactless way in which the Bourbon 
princes treated veterans of the Grand Army. Equally threaten- 
ing was the general situation in Europe. The demands of the 
tsar Alexander were for a time so exorbitant as to bring the powers 
at the congress of Vienna to the verge of war. Thus, everything 
portended a renewal of Napoleon's activity. The return of 
French prisoners from Russia, Germany, England and Spain 
would furnish him with an army far larger than that .which 
had won renown in 1814. So threatening were the symptoms 
that the royalists at Paris and the plenipotentiaries at Vienna, 
talked of deporting him to the Azores, while others more than 
hinted at assassination^ 

He solved the problem in characteristic fashion. On the 26th 
of February 181 5, when the English and French guardships 
were absent, he slipped away from Porto Ferrajo with some 
1000 men and landed near Antibes on the 1st of March. Except 
in royalist Provence he received everywhere a welcome which 
attested the attractive power of his personality and the nullity 
of the Bourbons. Firing no shot in his defence, his little tropp 
swelled until it became an army. Ney, who had said that Napoleon 
ought to be brought to Paris in an iron cage, joined him with 
6000 men on the 14th of March; and five days later the emperor 
entered the capital, whence Louis XVIII. had recently fled. 

Napoleon was not misled by the enthusiasm of the provinces 
and Paris. He knew that love of novelty and contempt for the 
gouty old king and his greedy courtiers had brought about this 
bloodless triumph; and he felt instinctively that he had to deal 
with a new France, which would not tolerate despotism. On 
his way to Paris he had been profuse in promises of reform and 
constitutional rule. It remained to make good those promises 
and to disarm the fear and jealousy of the great powers. This 
was the work which he set before hirriself in the Hundred Days 
(19th of March to 22nd of June 181 5). Were his powers, physical 
as well as mental, equal to the task ? This is doubtful. Certainly 
the evidence as to his health is somewhat conflicting. Some 
persons (as, for instance, Carnot, Pasquier, Lavalette and 
Thiebault) thought him prematurely aged and enfeebled. Others 
again saw no marked change in him; while Mollien, who knew 
the emperor weD, attributed the lassitude which now and then 
came over him to a feeling of perplexity caused by his changed 
circumstances. This explanation seems to furnish a correct 
clue. The autocrat felt cramped and chafed on all sides by the 
necessity of posing as a constitutional sovereign; and, while 
losing something of the old rigidity, he lost very much of the old 
energy, both in thought and action. His was a mind that worked 
wonders in well-worn grooves and on facts that were well under- 
stood. The necessity of devising compromises with men who 
had formerly been his tools fretted him both in mind and body. 
But when he left parliamentary affairs behind, and took the field, 
he showed nearly all the power both of initiative and of endurance 
which marked his masterpiece, the campaign of 1814. To date 
his decline, as Chaptal does, from the cold of the Moscow campaign 
is clearly incorrect. The time of lethargy at Elba seems to 
have been more unfavourable to his powers than the cold of 
Russia. At Elba, as Sir Neil Campbell noted, he became in- 
active and proportionately corpulent. There, too, as sometimes 
in 1815, he began to suffer intermittently from ischury, but to 
no serious extent. On the whole it seems safe to assert that it 
was the change in France far more than the change in his health 
which brought about the manifest constraint of the emperor 
in the Hundred Days. His words to Benjamin Constant — " I 
am growing old. The repose of a constitutional king may suit 
me. It will more surely suit my son " — show that his mind 
seized the salient facts of the situation; but his instincts struggled 
against them. Hence the malaise both of mind and body. 

The attempts of the royalists gave him little concern: the due 
d'Angouleme raised a small force for Louis XVIII. in the south, 
but at Valence it melted away in front of Grouchy's command; 
and the duke, on the 9th of April, signed a convention whereby 
they received a free pardon from the emperor. The royalists 
of la Vendue were later in moving and caused more trouble. 
But the chief problem centred in the constitution. At Lyons, 
on the 13th of March, Napoleon had issued an edict dissolving the 
existing chambers and ordering the convocation of a national 
mass meeting, or Champ de Mai, for the purpose of modifying the 
constitution of the Napoleonic empire. That work was carried 
out by Benjamin Constant in concert with the emperor. The 
resulting Acte additiond (supplementary to the constitutions 
of the empire) bestowed on France an hereditary chamber of 
peers and a chamber of representatives elected by the " electoral 
colleges " of the empire, which comprised scarcely one hundredth 
part of the citizens of France. As Chateaubriand remarked, in 
reference to Louis XVTII.'s constitutional charter, the new 
constitution — La Benjamine, it was dubbed — was merely a 
slightly improved charter. Its incompleteness displeased the 
liberals; only 1,532,527 votes were given for it in the plebiscite, 
a total less than half of those of the plebiscites of the Consulate. 
Not all the gorgeous display of the Champ de Mai (held on the 
1 st of June) could hide the discontent at the meagre fulfilment 
of the promises given at Lyons. Napoleon ended his speech with 
the words: " My will is that of the people: my rights are its 
rights." The words rang hollow, as was seen when, on the 3rd 
of June, the deputies chose, as president of their chamber, 
Lanjuinais, the staunch liberal who had so often opposed the 
emperor. The latter was with difficulty dissuaded from quashing 
the election. Other causes of offence arose, and Napoleon in 
his last communication to them warned them not to imitate the 
Greeks of the later Empire, who engaged in subtle discussions 
when the ram was battering at their gates. On the morrow 
(12th of June) he set out for the northern frontier. His spirits 
rose at the prospect of rejoining the army. At St Helena he told 
Gourgaud that he intended in 181 5 to dissolve the chambers 
as soon as he had won a great victory. 

In point of fact, the sword alone could decide his fate, both in 
internal and international affairs. Neither France nor Europe 
took seriously his rather vague declaration of his contentment 
with the r61e of constitutional monarch of the France of 1815. 
No one believed that he would be content with the "ancient 
limits." So often had he declared that the Rhine and Holland 
were necessary to France that every one looked on his present 
assertions as a mere device to gain time. So far back as the 13th 
of March, six days before he reached Paris, the powers at Vienna 
declared him an outlaw; and four days later Great Britain, 
Russia, Austria and Prussia bound themselves to put 150,000 
men into the field to end his rule. Their recollection of his 
conduct during the congress of Chatillon was the determining 
fact at this crisis; his professions at Lyons or Paris had not the 
slightest effect; his efforts to detach Austria from the coalition, 
as also- the feelers put forth tentatively by Fouch6 at Vienna, 
were fruitless. The coalitions, once so brittle as to break at the 
first strain, had now been hammered into solidity by his blows. 
If ever a man was condemned by his past, Napoleon was so in 
181 5. 

On arriving at Paris three days after Waterloo he still clung 
to the hope of concerting national resistance; but the temper 
of the chambers and of the public generally forbade any such 
attempt. The autocrat and Lucien Bonaparte were almost alone 
in believing that by dissolving the chambers and declaring 
himself dictator, he could save France from the armies of the 
powers now converging on Paris. Even Davout, minister of 
war, advised him that the destinies of France rested solely with 
the chambers. That was true. The career of Napoleon, which 
had lured France far away from the principles of 1789, now 
brought her back to that starting-point; just as, in the physical 
sphere, his campaigns from 1796-1814 had at first enormously 
swollen her bulk and then subjected her to a shrinkage still more 
portentous. Clearly it was time to safeguard what remained; 
and that could best be done under Talleyrand's shield of legiti- 
macy. Napoleon himself at last divined that truth. When 
Lucien pressed him to " dare," he replied " Alas, I have dared 
only too much already." On the 22nd of June he abdicated in 
favour of his son, well knowing that that was a mere form, as 
his son was in Austria. On the 25th of June he received from 
Fouche, the president of the newly appointed provisional 
government, an intimation that he must leave Paris. He retired 
to Malmaison, the home of Josephine, where she had died shortly 
after his first abdication. On the 29th of June the near approach 
of the Prussians (who had orders to seize him, dead or alive), 
caused him to retire westwards towards Rochefort, whence he 
hoped to reach the United States. But the passports which the 
provisional government asked from Wellington were refused, 
and as the country was declaring for the Bourbons, his position 
soon became precarious. On his arrival at Rochefort (3rd of 
July) he found that British cruisers cut off his hope of escape. 
On the 9th of July he received an order from the provisional 
government at Paris to leave France within twenty-four hours. 
After wavering between various plans, he decided on the 13th 
of July to cast himself on the generosity of the British govern- 
ment, and dictated a letter to the prince regent in which he com- 
pared himself to Themistocles seating himself at the hearth of his 
enemy. His counsellor, Las Cases, strongly urged that step and 
made overtures to Captain Maitland of H.M.S. " Bellerophon." 
That officer, however, was on his guard, and, while offering to 
convey the emperor to England declined to pledge himself in 
any way as to his reception. It was on this understanding (which 
Las Cases afterwards misrepresented) that Napoleon on the 
15th of July mounted the deck of the " Bellerophon." No other 
course remained. Further delay after the 15th of July would 
have led to his capture by the royalists, who were now every- 
where in the ascendant. In all but name he was a prisoner of 
Great Britain, and he knew it. 

The rest of the story must be told very briefly. The British 
government, on hearing of his arrival at Plymouth, decided to 
send him to St Helena, the formation of that island being such 
as to admit of a certain freedom of movement for the august 
captive, with none of the perils for the world at large which the 
tsar's choice, Elba, had involved. To St Helena, then, he pro- 
ceeded on board of H.M.S. " Northumberland." The title of 
emperor, which he enjoyed at Elba, had been forfeited by the 
adventure of 181 5, and he was now treated oificially as a general. 
Nevertheless, during his last voyage he enjoyed excellent health 
even in the tropics, and seemed less depressed than his associates, 
Bertrand, Gourgaud, Las Cases and Montholon. He landed at 
St Helena on the 17th of October. He resided first at " The 
Briars " with the Balcombes, and thereafter at Longwood, 
when that residence was ready for him. The first governor of 
the island, General Wilks, was soon superseded, it being judged 
that he was too amenable to influence from Napoleon; his 
successor was Sir Hudson Lowe. , 

Napoleon's chief relaxations at St Helena were found in the 
dictation of his memoirs to Montholon, and the compilation of 
monographs on military and political topics. The memoirs 
(which may be accepted as mainly Napoleon's, though Montholon 
undoubtedly touched them up) range over most of the events 
of his life from Toulon to Marengo. The military and historical 
works comprise pr&cis of the wars of Julius Caesar, Turenne and 
Trederick the Great. He began other accounts of the campaigns 
of his own age; but they are marred by his having had few 
trustworthy documents and statistics at hand. On a lower 
level as regards credibility stands the Memorial de Sainte- 
Htlbne, compiled by Las Cases from Napoleon's conversations 
with the obvious aim of creating a Napoleonic legend. Never- 
theless the Memorial is of great interest — e.g. the passage 
(iv. 451-454) in which Napoleon reflects on the ruin wrought 
to his cause by the war in Spain, or that (iii. 130) dealing with 
his fatal mistake in not dismembering Austria after Wagram, and 
in marrying an Austrian princess — " There I stepped on to an 
abyss covered with flowers "; or that again (iii. 79) where he 
represented himself as the natural arbiter in the immense 
struggle of the present against the past, and asserted that in ten 
years' time Europe would be either Cossack or republican. It is 
noteworthy that in Gourgaud's Journal de Ste. Hilbne there are 
very few reflections of this kind and the emperor appears in a guise 
far more life-like. But in the works edited by Montholon and 
Las Cases, where the political aim constantly obtrudes itself, 
the emperor is made again and again to embroider on the -theme 
that he had always been the true champion of ordered freedom.- 
This was the mot d y ordre at Longwood to his companions, who 
set themselves deliberately to propagate it. The folly of the 
monarchs of the Holy Alliance in Europe gained for the writings 
of Montholon and Las Cases (that of Gourgaud was not published 
till 1899) a ready reception, with the result that Napoleon 
reappeared in the literature of the ensuing decades wielding 
an influence scarcely less potent than that of the grey-coated 
figure into whose arms France flung herself on his return from 
Elba. All that he had done for her in the days of the Consulate 
was remembered; his subsequent proceedings — his tyranny, 
his shocking waste of human life, his deliberate persistence in 
war when France and Europe called for a reasonable and lasting j^,^ 
peace — all this was forgotten; and the great warrior, whai lkd^' 
^of ^nce r^iuthg ^sth of May 1821 , was thereafter enshrouded in 
m^tsoflegendthrough whlcITTns form loomed as that of a 
Prometheus condemned to a lingering agony for his devotion 
to the cause of humanity. It was this perversion of fact which " 
rendered possible the career of Napoleon III. 

Bibliography. — In the following list only the most helpful and 
accessible works can be enumerated. Asterisks are placed against 
those works which have been translated into English. 

A. General: Histories and Biographies. *A. Thiers, Histoire de 
la Revolution frangaise, du Constdat el de VEmpire (many editions 
in French and English); *P. Lanfrey, Histoire de NapoUon I, (5 
vols., Paris, 1 867-1875) (incomplete) { Sir A. Alison, History of 
Europe, 1789-1815 (14 vols., London, 1833-1842); J. Holland Rose, 
The Life of Napoleon I. (2 vols., London ; 3rd ed., 1905) ; A. Fournier, 
Napoleon der erste (3 vols., Prague and Vienna, 1889); W. M. 
Sloane, Napoleon: a History (4 vols., London, 1896-1897); O'Connor 
Morris, Napoleon (New York, 1893) ; E. Lavisse and A. N. Rambaud, 
" La Revolution francaise, 1789-1799 " and " Napoleon," vols. viii. 
and ix. of the Histoire ginirale ; The Cambridge Modern History, vol. 
viii. (" The French Revolution ") and vol. ix. (" Napoleon ") 
(Cambridge, 1904 and 1906); W. Oncken, Das Zeitalter der Revolu- 
tion, des Kaiserreichs, una der Befreiungskriege (2 vols., Berlin, 1880) ; 
A. T. Mahan, Influence of Sea Power on the French Revolution and 
Empire (2 vols., London, 1892); A. Sorel, V Eur ope et la Revolution 
franchise (parts v.-viii. refer to Napoleon) (Paris, 1903-1904); 
F. Masson, NapoUon et safamille (4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900). 

The great source for Napoleon's life is the Correspondance de 
NapoUon I. (32 vols., Paris, 1858-1869). Though garbled in several 
places by the imperial commission appointed by Napoleon III. to 
edit the letters and despatches, it is invaluable. It has been supple- 
mented by the *Lettres inUites de NapoUon I**", edited by L. Lecestre 
(2 vols., Paris, 1897; Eng. ed. 1 vol., London, 1898), and Lettres 
inHites de NapoUon J« r , edited by L. de Brotonne (Paris, 1898) 
(with supplement, 1903). 

B. Works dealing mainly with particular periods. 

I. Early years (1769-1795). NapoUon inconnu (1786-1793), 
edited by F. Masson (2 vols., Paris, 1895) ; A. Chuquet, La Jeunesse 
de NapoUon I. (3 vols., Paris, 1897-1839); T. Nasica, Mimoires 



sur Venfance et la jeunesse de NapoUon I. (Paris, 1852): B. Gadobert, 
La Jeunesse de NapoUon I. (Pans, 1897) ; J. Colin, V Education mili- 
taire de NapoUpn (Paris, 1900); P. Cottin, Toulon et Us Anglais en 
1793 (Paris, 1898); H. F. T. Jung, Bonaparte et son temps, 1769^1799 
(3 vols., Paris, 1 880-1881); O. Browning, Napoleon: the First 
Phase (London, 1905); H. F. Hall, Napoleon's Notes on English 
History (London, 1905); C. J. Fox, NapoUon Bonaparte ana the 
Siege of Toulon (Washington, 1902); H. Zivy, Le Treize Vendimiaire 
(Paris, 1898). 

II. The Period 1796-1799. (For the campaigns of 1706-1800, 
1805-7, 1808-9, 1812-15, see French Revolutionary Wars and 
Na poleonic Campaigns.) The chief works on civil, diplomatic and 
personal affairs in the life of Napoleon for the period 1796-1799 are: 
P. Gaffarel, Bonaparte et Us republiques italiennes, 1^96-1799 (Paris, 
1895); C- Tivaroni, Storia cntica del risorgimento italiano (3 vols., 
Turin, 1899— (in progress)) ; E. Bonnal de Ganges, La Chute d f une 
rSpublique (Venise) (Paris, 1885); E. Quinet, Les Revolutions d'ltalie 
(Paris, 1842); J. du Teil, Rome, Naples et U directoire; armistices 
et traitis, 1} 9&-i7p7 (Paris, 1902) ; A. Sorel, Bonaparte et Hoche en 1797 ; 
L. Sciout, Le Directoire (3 vols., Paris, 1895); F. A. Aulard, Paris 
pendant la reaction thermidorienne et sous le directoire (5 vols., Paris, 
1898-1902); Comte A. J. C. J. Boulay de la Meurthe, Le Directoire 
et l f expedition oVEgypte (Paris, 1885); E. Driault, La Question 
oVOrient (Paris, 1898); D. Lacroix, Bonaparte en Egypte (Paris, 
1859); A. Vandal, VAvenement de Bonaparte (Paris, 1902-1903); 
*F. Rocquain, £tat de France an 18 Brumaire (Paris, 1874); Bona- 
parte & St Cloud (anonymous) (Paris, 1814). 

111. The Consulate and Empire (December 1799-April 18 14). 
(a) Family and personal affairs: *F. Masson, Napoleon ckez lui (2 
vols., Paris, 1893- ), * NapoUon et lesfemmes (3 vols., Paris, 1893- 
1902), Napolion et son JUs (Paris, 1904); M. F. A. de Lescure, 
NapoUon et safamille (Paris, 1867) ; *Lettres de Napolion & Josephine 
(Paris,* 1805); A. Guillois, NapoUon , Vhomme, le politique, Vorateur 
(2 vols., Paris, 1889); *A. Levy, NapoUon inttme (Paris, 1893); 
Baron C. F. de Me"neval, Napolion et Marie Louise (3 vols., Paris, 
1843-1845); Baron A. du Casse, Les Rois,frbres de NapoUon (Paris, 
1883) ; H. Welschinger, Le Divorce de NapoUon (Paris, 1889). 

(b) Plots against Napoleon: E. Daudet, Histoire de (^migration 
(3 vols., Paris, 1 886-1 890 and 1 904-1 905), and La Police et Us 
cnouans sous U consulat et V empire (Paris, 1895); G. de Cadoudal, 
Georges Cadoudal et la Chouannerie (Paris, 1887); E. Guillon, Les 
Complots mUitaires sous le consulat et V empire (Paris, 1894); *G. A. 
Thierry, Le Complot des Libelles, 1802 (Paris, 1903); Mimoires 
historiques sur la catastrophe du due d'Enghien (Paris, 1824) ; H. Wel- 
schinger, Le due d'Enghien (Paris, 1888); E. Hamel, Histoire des 
deux conspirations du Giniral Malet (Paris, 1873), 

(c) Administration, Finance, Education. (For the Code NapoUon 
see Code.) * J. Pelet de la Lozere, Opinions de NapoUon sur divers 
sujets de politique et d' administration (Paris, 1833); Damas-Hinard, 
NapoUon, ses opinions et jugements sur Us hommes et sur les ckoses 
(2 vols., Paris, 1838); L. Aucoc, Le Conseil d'ttat avant et depuis 
1789 (Paris, 1876); E. Monnet, Histoire de V administration pro- 
vinciate, departmentah et communale en France (Paris, 1885); F. A. 
Aulard, Paris sous U Consulat (Paris, 1903, seq.); L. de Lanzac de 
Laborie, Paris sous NapoUon (Paris, 1905, seq.); A. Edmond- 
Blanc, NapoUon I., ses institutions civiles et administratives (Paris, 
1880); H. Welschinger, La Censure sous U premier Empire (Paris, 
1882) ; C. van Schoor, La Presse sous le consulat et V empire (Brussels, 
1899) ; M. C. Gaudin (Due de Gaete), Notice historique sur Us finances 
de la France, 1800-1814 (Paris, 1818); R. Stourm, Les Finances du 
consulat (Paris, 1902); J. B. G. Fabry, Le Genie de la resolution 
consiMrf dans VHucation (3 vols., Paris, 1817-1818); F. Guizot, 
Essai sur Vhistoire et Vitat actuel de Vinstruction publique (Paris, 
1816); C. Schmidt, La Reforme de VJJniversiU impiriale en 1811 
(Paris, 1905). The memoirs of Chaptal, MSneval, Mollien, Ouvrard 
and Pasquier deal largely with these subjects. Those of Bourrienne 
and Fouche" are of doubtful authority ; the. latter are certainly not 
genuine. 

(d) Diplomacy and General Policy: Besides the works named 
under A, the following may be named as more especially applicable 
to this section : A. Lefebvre, Histoire des cabinets de V Europe pendant 
U consulat et Vempire (3 vols., Paris, 1845-1847); C. Auriol, La 
France, VAngUterre, et NapoUon, 1803-1806 (Paris, 1905); B. Bailleu, 
Preussen und Frankreich von 1795-1807-, Diplomatische Corre- 
spondenzen (2 vols., Leipzig, 1881-1887); Comte D. de Barral, 
Etude 
Amiens (Toronto, 1900) ;*Coquelle, NapoUon etVAngleterre,i8o3-i8i$ 
(Paris, 1904) ; A. Vandal, NapoUon et Alexandre I" (3 vols., Paris, 
1891-1893); W. Oncken, Oesterreich und Preussen im Befreiungs- 
kriege (2 vols., Berlin, 1876); H. A. L. Fisher, NapoUonic Statesman- 
ship: Germany (Oxford, [1903) ; A. Rambaud, La Domination 
francaise en Allemagne (2 vols., Paris, 1873-1874); G. Roloff, Die 
Kolonialpolitik NapoUons I. (Munich, 1899) and Politik und Krieg- 
fuhrung wahrend des Feldzuges von 1814 (Berlin, 1891); A. Fournier, 
Der Congress von CMtillon (Vienna and Prague, 1900) ; P. Grayer, 
NapoUon, roi de ViU d'Elbe (Paris, 1906); *H. Houssaye, 1815 {(3 
vols., Paris, 1808-1905); C. M. Talleyrand (Prince de Benevento), 
Lettres inHites a NapoUon, 1800-1809 (Paris, 1889). 

IV. Closing Years (from the second abdication, June 22nd 1815, 
to death). Captain F, L. Maitland, Narrative of the Surrender of 
Bonaparte (London, 1826; new ed„ 1904); Sir T.Ussher, Napoleon's 
Last Voyages (London, 1895; new ed., 1906); G. Gourgaud, Sainte- 
H4lhne: Journal inldite tde 1815 a 1818 (2 vols., Paris, 1899); 
Marquis C. J, de Montholon, Remits de la captiviti de Vempereur 
NapoUon a Ste HSUne (2 vols., Paris, 1847); Comte E. P. D. de 
Las Cases, Mimorial de Ste H&ene (4 vols., London and Paris, 1823) ; 
Lady Malcolm, A Diary of St HeUna (London, 1899); W. Forsyth, 
History of the Captivity of NapoUon at St Helena (3 vols., London 
1853); R. C. Seaton, NapoUon* s Captivity in Relation to Sir Hudson 
e 07 ^ ik? ndon > I 9°3) J Basil Jackson, Notes and Reminiscences of a 
are perversions of the truth, e.g. O'Meara's A Voice from St Helena 
(London, 1822), The works of Las Cases and Montholon should also 
be read with great caution. The same remark applies to Mrs L. A* 
Abell's Recollections of the Emperor Napoleon (London, 1844), 
W. Warden's Letters written on Board H.M.S. " Northumberland " 
(London, 1816) and J. Stokoe's With Napoleon at St HeUna (Eng. 
ed. f London, 1902). Santini's Appeal to the British Nation (London, 
181 7) and the Manuscrit venu de Ste HUene d'une manikre inconnue 
(London, 1817) are forgeries. (J. Hl. R.) 


NAPOLEON II., emperor of the French, the style given by 
the Bonapartists to the son of Napoleon I., Napoleon Francis 
Joseph Charles, duke of Reichstadt (g.tf.). The fact that in 
18 1 4, by Napoleon I.'s abdication in his favour, the king of 
Rome (as he was then styled) became for a few days titular 
emperor " by the will of the people," was held *by Prince Louis 
Napoleon to justify his own assumption of the style of Napoleon 
III. which, as seeming to involve a dynastic claim, gave such 
offence to the legitimist powers, notably the emperor Nicholas I. . 
of Russia. 


NAPOLEON III. [Charles Louis Napoleon Bonaparte] 
(1808-1873), emperor of the French, was born on the 20th of 
April 1808 in Paris at 8 rue Cerutti (now rue Laffitte), and not 
at the Tuileries, as the official historians state. -He was the third 
son of Louis Bonaparte (see Bonaparte), brother of Napoleon L, 
and from 1806 to 1810 king of Holland, and of Hortense de 
Beauharnais, daughter of General (de) Beauharnais and Josephine 
Tascher de la Pagerie, afterwards the empress Josephine; hence 
he was at the same time the nephew and the adopted grandson, 
of the great emperor. Of the two other sons of Louis Bonaparte 
and Hortense, the elder, Napoleon Charles (1802-1807), died 
of croup at The Hague; the second, Napoleon Louis (1804-1831), 
died in the insurrection of the Romagna, leaving no children. 
Doubts have been cast on the legitimacy of Louis Napoleon; for 
the discord between Louis Bonaparte, who was ill, restless and 
suspicious, and his pretty and capricious wife was so violent 
and open as to justify all conjectures. But definite evidence, 
in the shape of letters and references in memoirs, enables us 
to deny that the Dutch Admiral Verhuell was the father of Louis 
Napoleon,and there is strong evidence of resemblance in character 
between King Louis and his third son. He early gave signs of a 
grave and dreamy character. Many stories have been told about 
his childhood, for example the remark which Napoleon I, is said 
to have made about him: " Who knows whether the future 
of my race may not lie in this child." It is certain that, after 
the abdication and exile of Louis, Hortense lived in France with 
her two children, in close relation with the imperial court. 
During the Hundred Days, Louis Napoleon, then a child of 
seven, witnessed the presentation of the eagles to 50,000 soldiers; 
but a few weeks later, before his departure for Rochefort, the 
defeated Napoleon embraced him for the last time, and his 
mother had to receive Frederick William III. of Prussia and his 
two sons at the chateau of Saint-Leu; here the victor and the 
vanquished of Sedan met for the first time, and probably played 
together. 

After Waterloo, Hortense, suspected by the Bourbons of having 
arranged the return from Elba, had to go into exile. The ex- 
king Louis, who now lived at Florence, had compelled her by a 
scandalous law-suit to give up to him the elder of her two children. 
With her remaining child she wandered, under the name of 
duchesse de Saint-Leu, from Geneva to Aix, Carlsruhe and 
Augsburg. In 181 7 she bought the castle of Arenenberg, in the 
canton of Turgau, on a wooded hill looking over the Lake of 
Constance. Hortense supervised her son's education in person, 
and tried to form his character. His tutor was Philippe Le Bas, 
son of the well-known member of the Convention and follower 
of Robespierre, an able man, imbued with the ideas of the 
Revolution, while Vieillard, who instructed him in the rudiments, 
was a democratic imperialist also inspired with the ideal of 
nationalism. The young prince also studied at the gymnasium 
at Augsburg, where his love of work and his mental qualities were 
gradually revealed; he was less successful in mathematics than 
in literary subjects, and he became an adept at physical exercises, 
such as fencing, riding and swimming. It was at this time that 
he acquired the slight German accent which he never lost. 
Those who educated him never lost sight of the future; but it 
was above all his mother, fully confident of the future destiny 
of the Bonapartes, who impressed on him the idea that he would 
be king, or at any rate, that he would accomplish some great 
works. " With your name," she said, " you will always count for 
something, whether in the old world of Europe or in the new." 
If we may believe Mme Cornu, he already at the age of twelve 
had dreams of empire. 

In 1823 he accompanied his mother to Italy, visiting his father 
at Florence, and his grandmother Letitia at Rome, and dreaming 
with Le Bas on the banks of the Rubicon. He returned to 
Arenenburg to complete his military education under Colonel 
Armandi and Colonel Dufour, who instructed him in artillery 
and military engineering. At the age of twenty he was a 
" Liberal," an enemy of the Bourbons and of the treaties of 181 5; 
but he was dominated by the cult of the emperor, and for him 
the liberal ideal was confused with the Napoleonic. 

The July revolution of 1830, of which he heard in Italy, 
roused all his young hopes. He could not return to France, for 
the law of 1816 banishing all his family had not been abrogated. 
But the liberal revolution knew no frontiers. Italy shared in 
the agitation. He had already met some of the conspirators 
at Arenenberg, and it is practically established that he now 
joined the associations of the Carbonari. Following the advice 
of his friend the Count Arese and of Menotti, he and his brother 
were among the revolutionaries who in February 1831 attempted 
a rising in Romagna and the expulsion of the pope from Rome. 
They distinguished themselves at Civita Castellana, a little 
town which they took; but the Austrians arrived in force, and 
during the retreat Napoleon Louis, the elder son, took .cold, 
followed by measles, of which he died. Hortense hurried to 
the spot and took steps which enabled her to save her second son 
from the Austrian prisons. He escaped into France, where his 
mother, on the plea of his illness, obtained permission from 
Louis Philippe for him to stay in Paris. But he intrigued with 
the republicans, and Casimir-Perier insisted on the departure 
of both mother and son. In May 1831 they went to London, 
and afterwards returned to Arenenberg. 

For a time he thought of responding to the appeal of some of 
the Polish revolutionaries, but Warsaw succumbed (September 
1831) before he could set out. Moreover the plans of this young 
and visionary enfant du sibcle were becoming more definite. 
The duke of Reichstadt died in 1832. His uncle, Joseph, and 
his father, Louis, showing no desire to claim the inheritance 
promised them by the constitution of the year XII., Louis 
Napoleon henceforth considered himself as the accredited 
representative of the family. Those who came in contact with 
him noticed a transformation in his character; he tried to hide 
his natural sensibility under an impassive exterior, and concealed 
his political ambitions. He became indeed " donx entile " 
(gentle but obstinate) as his mother called him, persistent in 
his ideas and always ready to return to them, though at the 
same time yielding and drawing back before the force of circum- 
stances. He endeavoured to define his ideas, and in 1833 published 
his Reveries politiques, suivies d'un projet de constitution, and 
Considerations politiques et militaires sur la Suisse; in 1836, 
as a captain, in the Swiss service, he published a Manuel 
d'artillerie, in order to win popularity with the French army. 
A phrase of Montesquieu, placed at the head of this work, sums 
up the views of the young theorist: "The people, possessing 
the supreme power, should do for itself all that it is able to do; 
what it cannot do well, it must do through its elected repre- 
sentatives." The supreme authority entrusted to the elect of 
the people was always his essential idea. But the problem was 
how to realize it. Louis Napoleon could feel vaguely the state 
of public opinion in France, the longing for glory from which 
it suffered, and the deep-rooted discord between the nation and 
the king, Louis Philippe, who though sprung from the national 
revolution against the treaties of 1815, was yet a partisan of 
peace at any price. Both Chateaubriand and Carrel had praised 
the prince's first writings. Bonapartists and republicans found 
common ground in the glorious tradition sung by Beranger. 
A military conspiracy like those of Berton or the sergeants 
of La Rochelle, seemed feasible to Napoleon. A new friend of 
his, Fialin, formerly a non-commissioned officer and a journalist, 
an energetic and astute man and a born conspirator, spurred 
him on to action. 

With the aid of Fialin and Eleonore Gordon, a singer, who 
is supposed to have been his mistress, and with the co-operation 
of certain officers, such as Colonel Vaudrey, an old soldier of 
the Empire, commanding the 4th regiment of artillery, and 
Lieutenant Laity, he tried to bring about a revolt of the garrison 
of Strassburg (October 30, 1836). The conspiracy was a failure, 
and Louis Philippe, fearing lest he might make the pretender 
popular either by the glory of an acquittal or the aureole of 
martyrdom, had him taken to Lorient and put on board a ship 
bound for America, while his accomplices were brought before 
the court of assizes and acquitted (February 1837). The prince 
was set free in New York in April; by the aid of a false passport 
he returned to Switzerland in August, in time to see his mother 
before her death on the 3rd of October 1837. 

At any other time this attempt would have covered its author 
with ridicule. Such, at least, was the opinion of the whole of the 
family of Bonaparte. But his confidence was unshaken, and 
in the woods of Arenenberg the romantic-minded friends who 
remained faithful to him still honoured him as emperor. And 
now the government of Louis Philippe, by an evil inspiration, 
began to act in such a way as to make him popular. In 1838 
it caused his partisan Lieutenant Laity to be condemned by the 
Court of Peers to five years' imprisonment for a pamphlet which 
he had written to justify the Strassburg affair; then it demanded 
the expulsion of the prince from Switzerland, and when the Swiss 
government resisted, threatened war. Having allowed the July 
monarch to commit himself, Louis Napoleon at the last moment 
left Switzerland voluntarily. All this served to encourage the 
mystical adventurer. In London, where he had taken up his 
abode, together with Arese, Fialin (says Persigny), Doctor 
Conneau and Vaudrey, he was at first well received in society, 
being on friendly terms with Count d'Orsay and Disraeli, and 
frequenting the salon of Lady Blessington. He met with various 
adventures, being present at the famous tournament given by 
Lord Eglinton, and yielded to the charm of his passionate 
admirer Miss Howard. But it was a studious life, as well as the 
life of a dandy, that he led at Carlton House Terrace. Not for 
a minute did he forget his mission: " Would you beh'eve it," 
the duke of Wellington wrote of him, " this young man will not 
have it said that he is not going to be emperor of the French. 
The unfortunate affair of Strassburg has in no way shaken this 
strange conviction, and his chief thoughts are of what he will 
do when he is on the throne." He was in fact evolving his 
programme of government, and in 1839 wrote and published 
his book: Des IdSes napoUoniennes, a curious mixture of Bona- 
partism, socialism and pacificism, which he represented as the 
tradition of the First Empire. He also followed attentively 
the fluctuations of French opinion. 

Since 1838 the Napoleonic propaganda had made enormous 
progress. Not only did certain newspapers, such as the Capitole 
and the Journal du Commerce, and clubs, such as the Culottes 
de peau carry it on zealously; but the diplomatic humiliation 
of France in the affair of Mehcmet Ali {q.v.) in 1840, with the 
outburst of patriotism which accompanied it, followed by the 
concessions made by the government to public opinion, such as, 
for example, the bringing back of the ashes of Napoleon I., 
all helped to revive revolutionary and Napoleonic memories. 

The pretender, again thinking that the moment had come, 
formed a fresh conspiracy. With a little band of fifty-six followers 
he attempted to provoke a rising of the 42nd regiment of the 
line at Boulogne, hoping afterwards to draw General Magnan 
to Lille and march upon Paris. The attempt was made on the 
6th of August 1840, but failed; he saw several of his supporters 
fall on the shore of Boulogne, and was arrested together with 
Montholon, Persigny and Conneau. This time he was brought 
before the Court of Peers with his accomplices; he entrusted 
his defence to Berryer and Marie, and took advantage of his 
trial to appeal to the supremacy of the people, which he alleged, 
had been disregarded, even after 1830. He was condemned 
to detention for life in a fortress, his friend Aladenize being 
deported, and Montholon, Parquin, Lombard and Fialin being 
each condemned to detention for twenty years. On the 15th of 
December, the very day that Napoleon's ashes were deposited at 
the Invalides, he was taken to the fortress of Ham. The country 
seemed to forget him; Lamartine alone foretold that the honours 
paid to Napoleon I. would shed lustre on his nephew. His prison 
at Ham was unhealthy, and physical inactivity was painful 
to the prince, but on the whole the regime imposed upon him 
was mild, and his captivity was lightened by Alexandrine 
Vergeot, " la belle sabotiere" or Mdlle Badinguet (he was later 
nicknamed Badinguet by the republicans). His more intel- 
lectual friends, such as Mme Cornu, also came to visit him and 
assisted him in his studies. He corresponded with Louis Blanc, 
George Sand and Proudhon, and collaborated with the journalists 
of the Left, Degeorge, Peauger and Souplet. For six years 
he worked very hard " at this University of Ham," as he said. 
He wrote some Fragments historiques, studies on the sugar- 
question, on the construction of a canal through Nicaragua, 
and on the recruiting of the army, and finally, in the Progres 
du Pas-de-Calais, a series of articles on social questions which 
were later embodied in his Extinction du paupfrisme (1844). 
But the same persistent idea underlay all his efforts. " The 
more closely the body is confined/' he wrote, " the more the mind 
is disposed to indulge in flights of imagination, and to consider 
the possibility of executing projects of which a more active 
existence would never perhaps have left it the leisure to think." 
On the 25th of May 1846 he escaped to London, giving as the 
reason" for his decision the dangerous illness of his father. On 
the 27th of July his father died, before he could accomplish 
a journey undertaken in spite of the refusal of a passport by 
the representative of Tuscany. 

He was again well received in London, and he " made up for 
his six years of isolation by a furious pursuit of pleasure." The 
duke of Brunswick and the banker Ferrere interested them- 
selves in his future, and gave him money, as did also Miss Howard, 
whom he later made comtesse de Beauregard, after restoring to 
her several millions. He was still full of plans and new ideas, 
always with the same end in view; and for this reason, in spite of 
his various enterprises, which were sometimes ridiculous, some- 
times unpleasant in their consequences, and his unscrupulous- 
ness as to the men and means he employed, he always had a 
kind of greatness. He always retained his faith in his star. 
" They will come to me without any effort of my own," he said 
to Taglioni the dancer; and again to Lady Douglas, who was 
counselling resignation, he replied, " Though fortune has twice 
betrayed me, yet my destiny will none the less surely be fulfilled. 
I wait." He was not to wait much longer. 

As he well perceived, the popularity of his name, the vague 
" legend " of a Napoleon who was at once a democrat, a soldier 
and a revolutionary hero, was his only strength. But by his 
abortive efforts he had not yet been able to win over this immense 
force of tradition and turn it to his own purposes. The events 
which occurred from 1848 to 1852 enabled him to do so. He 
behaved with extraordinary skill, displaying in the heat of the 
conflict all the abilities of an experienced conspirator, knowing, 
" like the snail, how to draw in his horns as soon as he met with 
an obstacle " (Thiers), but supple, resourceful and unscrupulous 
as to the choice of men and means in his obstinate struggle for 
power. 

At the first symptoms of revolutionary disturbance he returned 
to France; on the 25th of February he offered his services to the 
Provisional Government, but, on being requested by it to depart 
at once, resigned himself to this course. But Persigny, Mocquard 
and all his friends devoted themselves to an energetic propaganda 
in the press, by pictures and by songs. After the 15th of May 
had already shaken the strength of the young republic, he was 
elected in June 1848 by four departments, Seine, Yonne, Charente- 
Inf6rieure and Corsica. In spite of the opposition of the executive 
committee, the Assembly ratified his election. But he had learnt 
to wait. He sent in his resignation from London, merely hazard- 
ing this appeal: " If the people impose duties on me, I shall 
know how to fulfil them." This time events worked in his favour; 
the industrial insurrection of June made the middle classes and 
the mass of the rural population look for a saviour, while it 
turned the industrial population towards Bonapartism, out of 
hatred for the republican bourgeois. The Legitimists seemed im- 
possible, and the people turned instinctively towards a Bonaparte. 

On the 26th of September he was re-elected by the same 
departments; on the nth of October the law decreeing the 
banishment of the Bonapartes was abrogated; on the 26th he 
made a speech in the Assembly defending his position as a 
pretender, and cut such a sorry figure that Antony Thouret 
contemptuously withdrew the amendment by which he had 
intended to bar him from rising to the presidency. Thus he was 
able to be a candidate for this formidable power, which had just 
been defined by the Constituent Assembly and entrusted to the 
choice of the people, " to Providence," as Lamartine said. 
In contrast to Cavaignac he was the candidate of the advanced 
parties, but also of the monarchists, who reckoned on doing 
what they liked with him, and of the Catholics, who gave him 
their votes on condition of his restoring the temporal power 
to Rome and handing over education to the Church. The former 
rebel of the Romagna, the Liberal Carbonaro, was henceforth to 
be the tool of the priests. In his very triumph appeared the 
ultimate cause of his downfall. On the 10th of December he 
was elected president of the Republic by 5,434,226 votes against 
1,448,107 given to Cavaignac. On the 20th of December he 
took the oath "to remain faithful to the democratic Republic 
. . . to regard as enemies of the nation all those who may attempt 
by illegal means to change the form of the established govern- 
ment." From this time onward his history is inseparable from 
that of France. But, having attained to power, he still en- 
deavoured to realize his cherished project. All his efforts, from 
the 10th of December 1848 to the 2nd of December 1852 tended 
towards the acquisition of absolute authority, which he wished 
to obtain, in appearance, at any rate, from the people. 

It was with this end in view that he co-operated with the 
party of order in the expedition to Rome for the destruction of 
the Roman republic and the restoration of the pope (March 31, 
1849), and afterwards in all the reactionary measures against the 
press and the clubs, and for the destruction of the Reds. But in 
opposition to the party of order, he defined his own personal 
policy, as in his letter to Edgard Ney (August 16, 1849), which 
was not deliberated upon at the council of ministers, and asserted 
his intention " of not stifling Italian liberty," or by the change 
of ministry on the 31st of October 1849, when, " in order to 
dominate all parties," he substituted for the men coming from 
the Assembly, such as Odilon Barrot, creatures of his own, such 
as Rouher and de Parieu, the Auvergne avocats, and Achille 
Fould, the banker. " The name of Napoleon," he said on this 
occasion, " is in itself a programme; it stands for order, authority, 
religion and the welfare of the people in internal affairs, and in 
foreign affairs for the national dignity." 

In spite of this alarming assertion of his personal policy, he 
still remained in harmony with the Assembly (the Legislative 
Assembly, elected on the 28th of May 1849) in order to carry 
out " a Roman expedition at home," i.e. to clear the administra- 
tion of all republicans, put down the press, suspend the right of 
holding meetings and, above all, to hand over education to the 
Church (law of the 15th of March 1850). But the machiavellian 
pretender, daily growing more skilful at manoeuvring between 
different classes and parties, knew where to stop and how to 
keep up a show of democracy. When the Assembly, by the law 
of the 31st of May 1850, restricted universal suffrage and reduced 
the number of the electors from 9 to 6 millions, he was able to 
throw upon it the whole responsibility for this coup oVUat bour- 
geois. " I cannot understand how you, the offspring of universal 
suffrage, can defend the restricted suffrage," said his friend Mme 
Cornu. " You do not understand," he replied, " I am preparing 
the ruin of the Assembly." " But you will perish with it," she 
answered. " On the contrary, when the Assembly is hanging 
over the precipice, I shall cut the rope." 

In fact, while trying to compass the destruction of the 
republican movement of the Left, he was taking careful steps to 
gain over all classes. " Prince , altesse, monsieur, monseigneur, 
citoyen " (he was called by all these names indifferently at the 
Elysee), he appeared as the candidate of the most incompatible 
interests, flattering the clergy by his compliments and formal 
visits, distributing cigars and sausages to the soldiers, promising 
the prosperous bourgeoisie " order in the street " and business, 
while he posed as the " father of the workers," and won the hearts 
of the peasants. At his side were his accomplices, men ready for 
anything, whose only hopes were bound up with his fortunes, 
such as Morny and Rouher; his paid publicists, such as Romieu 
the originator of the "red spectre"; his cudgel-bearers, the 
" Ratapoils " immortalized by Daumier, who terrorized the 
republicans. From the Elysee by means of the mass of officials 
whom they had at their command, the conspirators extended their 
activities throughout the whole country. 

He next entered upon that struggle with the Assembly, now 
discredited, which was to reveal to all the necessity for a change, 
and a change in his favour. In January 1851 he deprived 
Changarnier of his command of the garrison of Paris. " The 
Empire has come," said Thiers. The pretender would have pre- 
ferred, however," that it should be brought about] legally, the first 
step being his re-election in 1852. The Constitution forbade his 
re-election; therefore the Constitution must be revised. On the 
19th of July the Assembly threw out the proposal for revision, 
thus signing its own death-warrant, and the coup d'itat was 
resolved upon. He prepared for it systematically. The cabinet 
of the 26th of October 1851 gave the ministry for war to his 
creature Saint-Arnaud. All the conspirators were at their 
posts — Maupas at the prefecture of police, Magnan at the 
head of the troops in Paris. At the Elysee, Morny, adulterine son 
of Hortense, a hero of the Bourse and successful gambler, 
supported his half-brother by his energy and counsels. The 
ministry proposed to abrogate the electoral law of 1850, and 
restore universal suffrage; the Assembly by refusing made itself 
still more unpopular. By proposing to allow the president 
of the Assembly to call in armed force, the questors revealed 
the Assembly's plans for defence, and gave the Elysee a weapon 
against it (" donnent barre contre elle a TElysee "). The propo- 
sition was rejected (November 17), but Louis-Napoleon saw that 
it was time to act. On the 2nd of December he carried out his 
coup d'&tat. 

But affairs developed in a way which disappointed him. By 
dismissing the Assembly, by offering the people " a strong 
government," and re-establishing " a France regenerated by the 
Revolution of '89 and organized by the emperor," he had hoped 
for universal applause. But both in Paris and the provinces 
he met with the resistance of the Republicans, who* had re- 
organized in view of the elections of 1852. He struck at them 
by mixed commissions, deportations and the whole range of 
police measures. The decrets-lois of the year 1852 enabled him 
to prepare the way for the new institutions. On the 1st of 
December 1852 he became in name what he was already in deed, 
and was proclaimed Emperor of the French. He was then 44 
years old. " The impassibility of his face and his lifeless glance " 
showed observers that he was still the obstinate dreamer that 
he had been in youth, absorbed in his Idea. His unshaken 
conviction of his mission made him conscious of the responsibility 
which rested on him, but hid from him the hopeless defect in the 
coup d'itat. To carry out his conviction, he had still only a 
timid will, working through petty expedients; but here again 
his confidence in the future made him bold. In a people politically 
decimated and wearied, he was able to develop freely all the 
. Napoleonic ideals. Rarely has a man been able to carry out 
his system so completely, though perhaps in these first years he 
had to take more disciplinary measures than he had intended 
against the Reds, and granted more favours than was fitting 
to the Catholics, his allies in December 1848 and December 
1858. 

The aim which the emperor had in view was, by a concentration 
of power which should make him " the beneficent motive force 
of the whole social order " (constitution of the 14th of January 
1852; administrative centralization; subordination of the 
elected assemblies; control of the machinery of universal suffrage) 
to unite all classes in " one great national party " attached to the 
dynasty. His success, from 1852 to 1856, was almost complete. 
The nation was submissive, and a few scattered- plots alone 
showed that republican ideas persisted among the masses. 
As " restorer of the overthrown altars," he won over the " men 
in black," among them Veuillot, editor-in-chief of FUnivers, and 
allowed them to get the University into their hands. By the aid 
of former Orleanists, such as Billault, Fould and Morny, and 
Saint-Simonians such as Talabot and the Pereires, he satisfied 
the industrial classes, extended credit, developed means of 
communication, and gave a strong impetus to the business of 
the nation. By various measures, such as subsidies, charitable 
gifts and foundations, he endeavoured to show that " the idea 
of improving the lot of those who suffer and struggle against the 
difficulties of life was constantly present in his mind." His was 
the government of cheap bread, great public works and holidays. 
The imperial court was brilliant. The emperor, having failed to 
obtain the hand of a Vasa or Hohenzollern, married, on the 29th 
of January 1853, Eugenie de Montijo, comtesse de Teba, aged 
twenty-six and at the height of her beauty. 

France was " satisfied " in the midst of order, prosperity and 
peace. But a glorious peace was required; it must not be said 
that " France is bored," as Lamartine had said when the 
Napoleonic legend began to spread. The foreign policy of the 
Catholic party, by the question of the Holy Places and the 
Crimean War (1853-1856), gave him the opportunity of winning 
the glory which he desired, and the British alliance enabled him 
to take advantage of it. In the spring of 1855, as a definite success 
was still slow to come, he contemplated for a time taking the 
lead of the expedition in person, but his advisers dissuaded him 
from doing so, for fear of a revolution. In January 1856 he had 
the good fortune to win a diplomatic triumph over the new tsar, 
Alexander II. It was at Paris (February 25-March 30) that the 
conditions of peace were settled. 

The emperor was now at the height of his power. He appeared 
to the people as the avenger of 1840 and 1815, and the birth to 
him of a son, Eugene Louis Jean Joseph, on the 16th of March 
1856, assured the future of the dynasty. It was then that, 
strong in " the esteem and admiration with which he was sur- 
rounded," and " foreseeing a future full of hope for France," he 
dreamed of realizing the Napoleonic ideal in its entirety. This 
disciple of the German philologists, this crowned Carbonaro, 
the friend of the archaeologists and historians who were to help 
him to write the Histoire de Cisar, dreamed of developing the 
policy of nationalism, and of assisting the peoples of all countries 
to enfranchise themselves. 

From 1856 to 1858 he devoted his attention to the Rumanian 
nationality, and supported Alexander Cuza. But it was above 
all the deliverance of Italy which haunted his imagination. 
By this enterprise, which his whole tradition imposed upon him, 
he reckoned to flatter the amour-propre of his subjects, and rally 
to him the liberals and even the republicans, with their passion 
for propagandism. But the Catholics feared that the Italian 
national movement, when once started, would entail the downfall 
of the papacy; and in opposition to the emperor's Italian 
advisers, Arese and Prince Jerome Napoleon, they pitted the 
empress, who was frivolous and capricious, but an ardent Catholic. 
Napoleon III. was under his wife's influence, and could not openly 
combat her resistance. It was the Italian Orsini who, by 
attempting to assassinate him as a traitor to the Italian nation 
on the 14th of January 1858, gave him an opportunity to impose 
his will indirectly by convincing his wife that in the interests 
of his own security he must " do something for Italy." Events 
followed each other in quick succession, and now began the 
difficulties in which the Empire was to be irrevocably involved. 
Not only did the Italian enterprise lead to strained relations with 
Great Britain, the alliance with whom had been the emperor's 
chief support in Europe, and compromised its credit; but the 
claims of parties and classes again began to be heard at home. 

The Italian war aroused the opposition of the Catholics. 
After Magenta (June 4, 1859), it was the fears of the Catholics 
and the messages of the empress which, even more than the 
threats of Prussia, checked him in his triumph and forced him 
into the armistice of Villafranca (July 11, 1859). But the spread 
of the Italian revolution and the movement for annexation 
forced him again to intervene. He appealed to the Left against 
the Catholics, by the amnesty of the 17th of April 1859. His 
consent to the annexation of the Central Italian states, in 
exchange for Savoy and Nice (Treaty of Turin, March 24, i860) 
exposed him to violent attacks on the part of the ultramontanes, 
whose slave he had practically been since 1848. At the same 
time, the free-trade treaty with Great Britain (January 5, 
i860) aroused a movement against him among the industrial 
bourgeoisie. 

Thus at the end of i860, the very time when he had hoped that 
his personal policy was to rally round him once for all the whole 
of France, and assure the future of his dynasty, he saw, on the 
contrary, that it was turning against him his strongest sup- 
porters. He became alarmed at the responsibilities which he saw 
would fall upon him, and imagined that by an appearance of 
reform he would be able to shift on to others the responsibility 
for any errors he might commit. Hence the decrees of the 24th of 
November i860 (right of address, ministers without portfolio) 
and the letter of the 14th of November 1861 (financial reform). 
From this time onward, in face of a growing opposition, anxiety 
for the future of his regime occupied the first place in the 
emperor's thoughts, and paralysed his initiative. Placed 
between his Italian counsellors and the empress, he was ever of 
two minds. His plans for remodelling Europe had a certain 
generosity and grandeur; but internal difficulties forced him into 
endless manoeuvre and temporization, which led to his ruin. 
Thus in October 1862, after Garibaldi's attack on Rome, the 
clerical coterie of the Tuileries triumphed. But the replacing 
of M. Thouvenel by M. Drouin de Lhuys did not satisfy the more 
violent Catholics, who in May 1863 joined the united opposition. 
Thirty-five opposers of the government were appointed, Re- 
publicans, Orleanists, Legitimists or Catholics. The emperor 
dismissed Persigny, and summoned moderate reformers such as 
Duruy and Behic. But he was still possessed with the idea of 
settling his throne on a firm basis, and uniting all France in some 
glorious enterprise which should appeal to all parties equally, and 
" group them under the mantle of imperial glory." From 
January to June 1863 he sought this appearance of glory in 
Poland, but only succeeded in embroiling himself with Russia. 
Then, after Syria and China, it was the " great inspiration of his 
reign," the establishment of a Catholic and Latin empire in 
Mexico, enthusiasm for which he tried in vain from 1863 to 1867 
to communicate to the French. 

But while the strength of France was wasting away at Puebla 
or Mexico, Bismarck was founding German unity. In August 
1864 the emperor, held back by French public opinion, which 
was favourable to Prussia, and by his idea of nationality, allowed 
Prussia and Austria to seize the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. 
After his failure in Poland and Mexico and hi face of the alarming 
presence of Germany, only one alliance remained possible for 
Napoleon III., namely with Italy. He obtained this by the 
convention of the 15th of September 1864 (involving the with- 
drawal of the French troops from Rome). But the Catholic 
party redoubled its violence, and the pope sent out the encyclical 
Quanta Cura and the Syllabus, especially directed against France. 
In vain the emperor sought in German affairs a definitive solution 
of the Italian question. At Biarritz he prepared with Bismarck 
the Franco-Prussian alliance of April 1866; and hoped to become, 
to his greater glory, arbiter in the tremendous conflict which was 
about to begin. But suddenly, while he was trying to rouse 
public opinion against the treaties of 1815, the news of the battle 
of Koniggratz came as a bolt from the blue to ruin his hopes. 
French interests called for an immediate intervention. But the 
emperor was ill, weary and aged by the life of pleasure which he 
led side by side with his life of work (as is proved by the letters 
to Mdlle Bellanger); he was suffering from a first attack of 
his bladder complaint. He knew, moreover, the insufficiency 
of his troops. After days of terrible suffering, he resigned 
himself to the annexation by Prussia of northern Germany. 
" Now," said M Drouin de Lhuys, " we have nothing left but to 
weep." 

Henceforth the brilliant dream, a moment realized, the realiza- 
tion of which he had thought durable,' was at an end. The 
Empire had still an uncertain and troubled brilliancy at the 
Exhibition of 1867. But Berezowski's pistol shot, which accen- 
tuated the estrangement from the tsar, and the news of the death 
of Maximilian at Queretaro, cast a gloom over the later fetes. 
In the interior the industrial and socialist movement, born of 
the new industrial development, added fresh strength to the 
Republican and Liberal opposition. The moderate Imperialists 
felt that some concessions must be made to public opinion. In 
opposition to the absolutist " vice-emperor " Rouher, whose 
influence over Napoleon had become stronger and stronger since 
the death of Morny, Emile Ollivier grouped the Third Party. 
Anxious, changeable and distraught, the emperor made the 
Liberal concessions of the 19th of January 1867 (right of inter- 
pellation), and then, when Ollivier thought that his triumph 
was near, he exalted Rouher (July) and did not grant the promised 
laws concerning the press and public meetings till 1868. Tfce 
opposition gave him no credit for these tardy concessions. There 
was an epidemic of violent attacks on the emperor; the publica- 
tion of the Lanterne and the Baudin trial, conducted by Gam- 
betta, were so many death-blows to the regime. The Inter- 
nationale developed its propaganda. The election cf May 1869 
resulted in 4,438,000 votes given for the government, and 
3>3 5 5 i°°° for the opposition, who also gained 90 representatives. 
The emperor, disappointed and hesitating, was slow to return to 
a parliamentary regime. It was not till December that he 
instructed Ollivier to " form a homogeneous cabinet representing 
the majority of the Corps Legislatif " (ministry of the 2nd of 
January 1870). But, embarrassed between the Arcadiens, 
the partisans of the absolute regime, and the republicans, 
Ollivier was unable to guide the Empire in a constitutional 
course. At the Tuileries Rouher's counsel still triumphed. It 
was he who inspired the ill and wearied emperor, now without 
confidence or energy, with the idea of resorting to the plebiscite. 
"To do away with the risk of a Revolution," " to place order 
and liberty upon a firm footing," " to ensure the transmission of 
the crown to his son," Napoleon III. again sought the approba- 
tion of the nation. He obtained it with brilliant success, for the 
last time, by 7,358,786 votes against 1,571,939, and his work 
now seemed to be consolidated. 

A few weeks later it crumbled irrevocably. Since 1866 he had 
been pursuing an elusive appearance of glory. Since 1 866 France 
was calling for " revenge." He felt that he could only rally the 
people to him by procuring them the satisfaction of their national 
pride. Hence the mishaps and imprudences of which Bismarck 
made such an insulting use. Hence the negotiations of Nikols- 
burg, the " note d'aubergiste " (innkeeper's bill) claiming the 
left bank of the Rhine, which was so scornfully rejected; hence 
the plan for the invasion of Belgium (August 1866), the Luxem- 
burg affair (March 1867), from which M. de Moustier's diplomacy 
effected such a skilful retreat; hence the final folly which led 
this government into the war with Prussia (July 1870). 

The war was from the first doomed to disaster. It might 
perhaps have been averted if France had had any allies. But 
Austria, a possible ally, could only join France if satisfied as 
regards Italy; and since Garibaldi had threatened Rome 
(Mentana, 1867), Napoleon III., yielding to the anger of the 
Catholics, had again sent troops to Rome. Negotiations had 
taken place in 1869. The emperor, bound by the Catholics, had 
refused to withdraw his troops. It was as a distant but inevitable 
consequence of his agreement of December 1848 with the Catholic 
party that in 1870 the emperor found himself without an ally. 

His energy was now completely exhausted. Successive 
attacks of stone in the bladder had ruined his physique; while 
his hesitation and timidity increased with age. The influence 
of the empress over him became supreme. On leaving the 
council in which the war was decided upon the emperor threw 
himself, weeping, into the arms of Princess Mathilde. The 
empress was delighted at this war, which she thought would 
secure her son's inheritance. 

On the 28th of July father and son set out for the army. 
They found it in a state of utter disorder, and added to the 
difficulties by their presence. The emperor was suffering from 
stone and could hardly sit his horse. After the defeat of Reichs- 
hoffen, when Bazaine was thrown back upon Metz, he wished to 
retreat upon Paris. But the empress represented to him that 
if he retreated it would mean a revolution. An advance was 
decided upon which ended in Sedan. On the 2nd of September, 
Napoleon III. surrendered with 80,000 men, and on the 4th of 
September the Empire fell. He was taken as a prisoner to the 
castle of Wilhelmshohe, near Cassel, where he stayed till the 
end of the war. After the intrigues of Bazaine, of Bismarck, 
and of the empress, the Germans having held negotiations 
with the Republic, he was de facto deposed. On the 1st of March 
the assembly of Bordeaux confirmed this deposition, and declared 
him " responsible for the ruin, invasion and dismemberment 
of France." 

Restored to liberty, he retired with his wife and son to 
Chislehurst in England. Unwilling even now to despair of the 
future, he still sought to rally his friends for a fresh propaganda. 
He had at his service publicists such as Cassagnac, J. Amigues 
and Hugelmann. He himself also wrote unsigned pamphlets 
justifying the campaign of 1870. It may be noted that, true to 
his ideas, he did not attempt to throw upon others the responsi- 
bility which he had always claimed for himself. He dreamed 
of his son's future. But he no longer occupied himself with any 
definite plans. He interested himself in pensions for workmen 
and economical stoves. At the end of 1872 his disease became 
more acute, and a surgical operation became necessary. He 
died on the 9th of January 1873, leaving his son in the charge 
of the empress and of Rouher. The young prince was educated 
at Woolwich from 1872 to 1875, and in 1879 took part in the 
English expedition against the Zulus in South Africa, in which 
he was killed. By his death vanished all hope of renewing the 
extraordinary fortune which for twenty years placed the 
descendant of the great emperor, the Carbonaro and dreamer, 
at once obstinate and hesitating, on the throne of France. 

Bibliography. — The CEuvres of Napoleon I II. have been published 
in four volumes (1 854-1 857) and his Histoire de Jules Cisar in two 
volumes (1865-1869); this latter work has been translated into 
English by T. Wright. See also Ebeling, Napoleon III. und sein 
Hoi (1891-1894) ; H. Thirria, NapoUon III. avant VEmpire (1895); 
Sylvain-BIot, NapoUon III. (1899); Giraudeau, NapoUon III. 
intime (1895); Sir W. A. Fraser, Napoleon III. (London, 1895); 
A. Forbes, Life of Napoleon III. (1898); A. Lebey, Les Trots coups 
d'e°tat de Louts Napoleon Bonaparte (1906); Louts NapoUon Bona- 
parte et la revolution de 1848^ (1908) ; and F. A. Simpson, The Rise of 
al works 
nd Empire (1868-1875J 
La Gorce, Histoire du second Empire (1 894-1 905); A. Thomas, Le 
e«^«*.j rM^'.^ f*ns\rv\. ««-ri t? /Aii:,.: n .. /■'l\^.*.,v * 
Louis Napoleon (1909). General works which may be consulted 
are Taxile-Delord, Histoire du second Empire ( 1868-18 7 5); P. de 
Second Empire (1907); and E. Ollivier, L Empire UbSral (14 vols., 
1895-1909). (A. Ts.) 


NAPOLEON, a round game of cards (known colloquially as 
" Nap "). Any number may play. The cards rank as at whist, 
and five are dealt to each player. The deal being completed, 
the player to the dealer's left looks at his hand and declares 
how many tricks he would play to win against all the rest, the 
usual rule being that more than one must be declared; in default 
of declaring he says " I pass," and the next player has a similar 
option of either declaring to make more tricks or passing, and 
so on all round. A declaration of five tricks is called " going 
Nap." The player who declares to make most has to try to 
make them, and the others, but without consultation, to prevent 
- him. The declaring hand has the first lead, and the first card 
he leads makes the trump suit. The players, in rotation, must 
follow suit if able. If the declarer succeeds in making at least 
the number of tricks he stood for he wins whatever stakes are 
played for; if not he loses. If the player declaring Nap wins 
he receives double stakes all round; if he loses he only pays 
single stakes all round. Sometimes, however, a player is allowed 
to go "Wellington" over "Nap," and even "Blucher" over 
"Wellington." In these cases the caller of " Wellington 9> 
wins four times the stake and loses twice the stake, the caller 
of " Blucher " receives six times and loses three times the stake. 
Sometimes a player is allowed to declare tnisere, i.e. no tricks. 
This ranks, as a declaration, between three and four, but the 
player pays a double stake on three, if he wins a trick, and receives 
a single on three if he takes none. 


NAPOLEONIC CAMPAIGNS.— r. The era of the Revolutionary 
and Napoleonic Wars falls into two main divisions, the first 
of which ( 1 792-1801) is dealt with under the heading French 
Revolutionary Wars. In the present article are described 
the campaigns in central and eastern Europe, directed by 
Napoleon — no longer one amongst many French generals, 
nor even a simple primus inter pares, but " Emperor " in the 
fullest sense — between the years 1805 and 1814. Napoleon'ss 
short Spanish Campaign of 1809 is dealt with under Peninsular 
War (this article covering the campaigns in Spain, Portugal and 
southern France 1808-1814), and for the final drama of Waterloo 
the reader is referred to Waterloo Campaign. 

The campaigns described below are therefore — 

(a) The Austrian War of 1805 (Ulm and Austerlitz). 

(b) The Conquest of Prussia and the Polish Campaign (Jena, 
Auerstadt, Eylau and Friedland). 

(c) The Austrian War of 1809 (Eckrmihl, Aspern and Wagram). 

(d) The Russian War of 1812 (Borodino and the retreat from Moscow). 

(e) The German " War of Liberation," culminating in the Battle 
of the Nations around Leipzig. 

	(/) The last campaign in France, 1814. 

The naval history of 1803-1815 includes the culmination and the 
sequel of the # struggle for command of the sea which began in 1793 
and reached its maximum intensity on the day of Trafalgar. 

2. The Campaign of 1805 may be regarded as a measure of 
self-defence forced upon Napoleon by the alliance of Russia 
(April nth), Austria (August 9th) and other powers with Great 
Britain. The possibility had long been before the emperor, and 
his intention in that event to march straight on Vienna by the 
valley of the Danube is clearly indicated in his reply (November 
27th, 1803) to a Prussian proposal for the neutralization of the 
South German states. In this he says, "It is on the road from 
Strassburg to Vienna that the French must force peace on 
Austria, and it is this road Which you wish us to renounce." 
When, therefore, on the 25th of August 1805, he learnt definitely 
that Villeneuve (see Naval operations below) had failed in his 
purpose of securing the command of the Channel, which was 
the necessary preliminary to the invasion of England, it was but 
the affair of a few hours to dictate the dispositions necessary to 
transfer his whole army to the Rhine frontier as the first step 
in its march to the Danube. On this date the army actually 
lay in the following positions:— 

	I. Corps Bernadotte Hanover (Gottingen) 
	II. „ Marmont Holland 
	III. „ Davout ^ 
	IV. „ Soult I Camp of Boulogne and 
	V. „ Lannes [ other points on the 
	VI. „ Ney J English Channel 
	VII. „ Augereau 
	Guard Bessieres Paris. 

The corps were, however, by no means fit for immediate service. 
Bernadotte's corps in Hanover was almost in the position of a 
beleaguered garrison, and the marshal could only obtain his 
transport by giving out that he was ordered to withdraw to 
France. Marmont and Davout were deficient in horses for 
cavalry and artillery, and the troops in Boulogne, having been 
drawn together for the invasion of England, had hardly any 
transport at all, as it was considered this want could be readily 
supplied on landing. The composition of the army, however, was 
excellent. The generals were in the prime of life, had not yet 
learnt to distrust one another, and were accustomed to work 
under the emperor and with one another. The regimental 
officers had all acquired their rank before the enemy and knew 
how to manage their men, and of the men themselves nearly 
two-thirds had seen active service. The strength of the army 
lay in its infantry, for both cavalry and artillery were short of 
horses, and the latter had not yet acquired mobility and skill 
in manoeuvring. Napoleon's determination to undertake the 
f invasion of England has often been disputed, but it is hard to 
imagine what other operation he contemplated, for the outbreak 
of hostilities with his continental enemies found him ill-supplied 
with intelligence as to the resources of the country he had then 
to traverse. To remedy this, Murat and other general officers 
as well as minor agents were sent ahead and instructed to travel 
through South Germany in plain clothes with a view to collecting 
information and mastering the topography. The emperor 
was, moreover, imperfectly acquainted with the degree of pre- 
paration of his adversaries' designs, and when he dictated his 
preliminary orders he was still unaware of the direction that 
the allies' advance would assume. That he foresaw the march 
of events which ultimately drew Mack to Ulm is inconceivable. 
On the 26th of August, however, he learnt that 100,000 Russians 
were about to enter Bohemia thence to unite with an Austrian 
army of 80,000 near the junction of the Inn and Danube, and 
this information compelled him to alter the general direction 
of his advance so as to traverse the defiles of the Black Forest 
north of the Neckar, cavalry only observing the passes to the 
south. 

3. Austrian Army.-r-The Austrians after the defeats of 1800 
had endeavoured to reorganize their forces on the French model, 
but they were soon to learn that in matters of organization the 
spirit is everything, the letter very little. They had copied 
the organization of the French corps, but could find no corps 
commanders fit to assume the responsibility for these commands. 
As always in such conditions, the actual control of the smallest 
movements was still centralized in the hands of the army com- 
manders, and thus the rate of marching was incredibly slow. 
They had decided that in future their troops in the field should 
live by requisition, and had handed over to the artillery, which 
needed them badly, a large number of horses thus set free from 
the transport service, but they had not realized that men 
accustomed to a regular distribution of rations cannot be trans- 
formed into successful marauders and pillagers by a stroke of 
the pen; and they had sent away the bulk of their army, 120,000 
under their best general, the archduke Charles, into Italy, leaving 
Lieut. Field Marshal Mack von Leiberich in Germany, nominally 
as chief of the staff to the young Prince Ferdinand, but virtually 
in command, to meet the onset of Napoleon at the head of his 
veterans. Mack was a man of unusual attainments. He had 
risen from the ranks in the most caste-ridden army in Europe, 
and against untold opposition had carried through army reforms 
which were correct in principle, and needed only time to develop. 
It was his fate to be made the scapegoat for the disasters which 
followed, though they need no further explanation than that, 
at the head of 80,000 men and- exercising only restricted powers 
of command, he was pitted against the greatest strategist of all 
ages who was responsible to no overlord and commanded, in the 
fullest sense of the term, an army considerably more than twice 
as strong. 

4. The March on Ulm. — The outbreak of the campaign was 
hastened by the desire of the Austrian government to feed their 
own army and leave a bare country for Napoleon by securing the 
resources of Bavaria. It. was also hoped that the Bavarians 
with their army of 25,000 men would join the allies. In the latter 
hope they were deceived, and the Bavarians under General 
Wrede slipped away to Bamberg in time. In the former, how- 
ever, they were successful, and the destitution they left in their 
wake almost wrecked Napoleon's subsequent combinations. 
Mack's march to Ulm was therefore a necessity of the situation, 
and his continuance in this exposed position, if foolhardy against 
such an adversary, was at any rate the outcome of the high 
resolve that even if beaten he would inflict crippling losses upon 
the enemy. Mack knew that the Russians would be late at the 
rendezvous on the Inn. By constructing an entrenched camp 
at Ulm and concentrating all the available food within it, he 
expected to compel Napoleon to invest and besiege him, and 
he anticipated that in the devastated country his adversary 
would be compelled to separate and thus fall an easy prey to the 
Russians. For that blow he had determined to make his own 
army the anvil. But these views obviously could not be pub- 
lished in army orders, hence the discontent and opposition he was 
destined to encounter. 

5. Movements of the French. — It was on the 21st that Napoleon 
learnt of Mack's presence in Ulm. On that date his army had 
crossed the Rhine and was entering the defiles of the Black 
Forest. It was already beginning to suffer. Boots were worn out, 
greatcoats deficient, transport almost unattainable and, accord- 
ing to modern ideas, the army would have been considered 
incapable of action. 

	Sept. 28. 
	Oct. 6. 
	Oct. 9. 
	Oct. 16. 
	Bernadotte . 
	Wurzburg 
	Anspach 
	Nurnberg 
	Regensburg 
	Marmont . 
	Wiirzburg 
	Anspach 
	Nurnberg 
	Regensburg 
	Davout . 
	Mannheim 
	Mergentheim 
	Crailsheim 
	Anspach 
	Dietfurt 
	Ney . . 
	Selz 
	Weissenburg 
	Ingolstadt 
	Lannes . 
	Strassburg 
	Gmund 
	N6rdlingen 
	Neuburg 
	Soult . . 
	Landau 
	Aalen 
	Donauworth 

On the 26th of September, its deployment beyond the mountains 
was complete, and as Napoleon did not know of Mack's intention 
to stay at Ulm and had learned that the Russian advance had 
been delayed, he directed his columns by the following roads on 
the Danube, between Donauworth and Ingolstadt, so as to be 
in a position to intervene between the Austrians and the Russians 
and beat both in detail. On the 7th of October this movement 
was completed — the Austrians abandoned the Danube bridges 
after a show of resistance, retreating westward — and Napoleon, 
leaving Murat in command of the V. and VI. corps and cavalry 
to observe the Austrians, pressed on to Augsbuig with the others 
so as to be ready to deal with the Russians. Learning, however, 
that these were still beyond striking radius, he determined to deal 
with Mack's army first, having formed the fixed conviction that 
a threat at the latter's communications would compel him to 
endeavour to retreat southwards towards Tirol. Bernadotte 
in his turn became an army of observation, and Napoleon 
joining Murat with the main body marched rapidly westward 
from the Lech towards the Iller. 

6. Austrian Plans. — Mack's intentions were not what Napoleon 
supposed. He had meanwhile received (false) information of a 
British landing at Boulogne, and he was seriously deceived as to 
the numbers of Napoleon's forces. He was also aware that the 
exactions of the French had produced deep indignation through- 
out Germany and especially 'in Prussia (whose neutrality had 
been violated, see § 14, below) . All this, and the almost mutinous 
discontent of his generals and his enemies of the court circle, 
shook his resolution of acting as anvil for the Russians, of whose 
delay also he was aware, and about the 8th of October he deter- 
mined to march out north-eastward across the French lines of 
communication and save his sovereign's army by taking refuge 
if necessary in Saxony. Believing implicitly in the rumours of a 
descent on Boulogne and of risings in France which also reached 
him, and knowing the destitution he had left behind him in his 
movement to Ulm, when he heard of the westward march of 
French columns from the Lech he told his army, apparently in 
all good faith, that the Fi ench were in full march for their own 
country. 

Actually the French at this moment were suffering the most 
terrible distress — up to the Danube they had still found sufficient 
food for existence, but south of it, in the track of the Austrians, 
they found nothing. All march discipline disappeared, the men 
dissolved into hordes of marauders and even the sternest of the 
marshals wrote piteous appeals to the emperor for supplies, and 
for permission to shoot some of their stragglers. But to all these 
Berthier in the emperor's name sent the stereotyped reply — 
" The emperor has ordered you to carry four days' provisions, 
therefore you can expect nothing further— you know the 
emperor's method of conducting war." 

7. Action of Albeck or Haslack. — Meanwhile Murat, before the 
emperor joined him, had given Mack the desired opening. 
The VI. corps (Ney) should have remained on the left bank of 
the Danube to close the Austrian exit on that side, but by mistake 
only Dupont's division had been left at Albeck, the rest being 

	Emery W*lkcrst 

brought over the river. Mack on the 8th had determined to 
commence his withdrawal, but fortune now favoured the French. 
The weather during the whole of October had been unusually 
wet, the swollen Danube overflowed the low ground and the 
roads had become quagmires. On the south bank, owing to 
better natural drainage and a drier subsoil, movement was fairly 
easy, but the Austrians found it almost impossible. On the nth 
of October, when they began their march, the road along the 
Danube was swept into the river, carrying with it several guns 
and teams, and hours were consumed in passing the shortest 
distances. At length in the afternoon they suddenly fell upon 
Dupont's isolated division at Albeck, which was completely 
surprised and severely handled. The road now lay completely 
open, but the Austrian columns had so opened out owing to 
the state of the roads that the leading troops could not pursue 
their advantage — Dupont rallied and the Austrians had actually 
to fall back towards Ulm to procure food. 

8. Elchingen. — For three more days Mack struggled with an 
unwilling staff and despondent men to arrange a further advance. 
During these very three days, through a succession of staff 
blunders, the French failed to close the gap, and on the morning 
of the 14th of October both armies, each renewing their advance, 
came in contact at the bridge of Elchingen. This bridge, all 
but a few road-bearers, had been destroyed, but now the French 
gave an example of that individual gallantry which was char- 
acteristic of the old revolutionary armies. Running along the 
beams under a close fire a few gallant men forced their way 
across. The floor of the bridge was rapidly relaid, and presently 
the whole of the VI. corps was deploying with unexampled 
rapidity on the farther side. The Austrians, still in their quag- 
mire, could not push up reinforcements fast enough, and though 
Mack subsequently alleged deliberate obstruction and dis- 
obedience on the part of his subordinates, the state of the roads 
alone suffices to explain their defeat. Only the right column of 
the Austrians was, however, involved; the left under General 
Werneck, to whom some cavalry and the archduke Ferdinand 
attached themselves, did indeed succeed in getting away, but 
without trains or supplies. They continued their march, famished 
but unmolested, until near Heidenheim they suddenly found 
themselves confronted by what from the diversity of uniforms 
they took to be an overwhelming force; at the same time the 
French cavalry sent in pursuit appeared in their rear. Utterly 
exhausted by fatigue, Werneck with his infantry, some 8000 
strong, surrendered to what was really a force of dismounted 
dragoons and foot-sore stragglers improvised by the commanding 
officer on the spot to protect the French treasure chests, which at 
that moment lay actually in the path of the Austrians. The 
young archduke with some cavalry escaped. 

9. Mack surrounded. — The defeat at Elchingen on the 14th of 
October sealed the fate of the Austrians, though Mack was still 
determined to endure a siege. As the French columns coming 
up from the south and west gradually surrounded him, he drew 
in his troops under shelter of the fortress and its improvised 
entrenched camp, and on the 15th he found himself completely 
surrounded. On the 16th the French field-guns fired into the 
town, and Mack realized that his troops were no longer under 
sufficient control to endure a siege. When, therefore, next 
morning, negotiations were opened by the French, Mack, still 
feeling certain that the Russians were at hand, agreed to an 
armistice and undertook to lay down his arms if within' the next 
twenty-one days no relief should arrive. To this Napoleon 
consented, but hardly had the agreement been signed than he 
succeeded in introducing a number of individual French soldiers 
into the fortress, who began rioting with the Austrian soldiery. 
Then, sending in armed parties to restore order and protect the 
inhabitants, he caused the guards at the gates to be overpowered, 
and Mack was thus forced into an unconditional surrender. 

On the 22nd of October, the day after Trafalgar, the remnant 
of the Austrian army, 23,000 strong, laid down its arms. About 
5000 men under Jellachich had escaped to Tirol, 2000 cuirassiers 
with Prince Ferdinand to Eger in Bohemia, and about 10,000 
men under Werneck, had surrendered at Heidenheim. The 
losses in battle having been insignificant, there remain some 
30,000 to account for — most of whom probably escaped individu- 
ally by the help of the inhabitants, who were bitlerly hostile to 
the French. 

10. Napoleon's Advance to Vienna. — Napoleon now hastened 
to rejoin the group of corps he had left under Bernadotte in 
observation towards the Russians, for the latter were nearer 
at hand than even Mack had assumed. But hearing of his 
misfortune they retreated before Napoleon's advance along the 
right bank of the Danube to Krems, where they crossed the river 
and withdrew to an entrenched camp near Olmtitz to pick up 
fresh Austrian reinforcements. The severe actions of Diirrenstein 
(near Krems) on the nth, and of Hollabriinn on the 16th of 
November, in which Napoleon's marshals learned the tenacity 
of their new opponents, and the surprise of the Vienna bridge 
(November 14) by the French, were the chief incidents of 
this period in the campaign. 

11. Campaign of Austerlitz. — Napoleon continued down the 
right bank to Vienna, where he was compelled by the con- 

dition of his troops to call a halt to refit his army. 
After this was done he continued his movement to 
Briinn. Thither he succeeded in bringing only 55,000 men. 
He was again forced to give his army rest and shelter, under 
cover of Murat's cavalry. The allies now confronted him with 
upwards of 86,000 men, including 16,000 cavalry. About the 
20th of November this force commenced its advance, and 
Napoleon concentrated in such a manner that within three days 
he could bring over 80,000 French troops into action around 
Briinn, besides 17,000 or more Bavarians under Wrede. On 
the 28th Murat was driven in by the allied columns. That night 
orders were despatched for a concentration on Briinn in expecta- 
tion of a collision on the following day; but hearing that the 
whole allied force was moving towards him he decided to con- 
centrate south-east of Briinn, covering his front by cavalry on 
the Pratzen heights. Meanwhile he had also prepared a fresh 
line of retreat towards Bohemia, and, certain now of having 
his men in hand for the coming battle, he quietly awaited 
events. 

The allies were aware of his position, and still adhering to the 
old " linear " system, marched to turn his right flank (see 
Austerlitz). As soon as their strategic purpose of cutting him 
off from Vienna became apparent, the emperor moved his troops 
into position, and in the afternoon issued his famous proclamation 
to his troops, pointing out the enemy's mistakes and his plan for 
defeating them. At the same time he issued his orders for his 
first great battle as a supreme commander. The battle of 
Austerlitz began early next morning and closed in the evening 
with the thorough and decisive defeat of the allies. 

12. Jena, 1806. — Around the Prussian army, and particularly 
the cavalry, the prestige of Frederick the Great's glory still 
lingered; but the younger generation had little 
experience of actual warfare, and the higher com- ^^ p ^i gttt 
manders were quite unable to grasp the changes in 
tactics and in the conduct of operations which had grown out 
of the necessities of the French Revolution. The individual 
officers of the executive staff were the most highly trained in 
Europe, but there was no great leader to co-ordinate their 
energies. The total number of men assigned to the field army 
was 110,000 Prussians and Saxons. They were organized in 
corps, but their leaders were corps commanders only in name, 
for none were allowed any latitude for individual initiative. 
Ill-judged economies had undermined the whole efficiency of 
the Prussian army. Two-thirds of the infantry and one-half of 
the cavalry were allowed furlough for from ten to eleven months 
in the year. The men were unprovided with greatcoats. Most 
of the muskets had actually seen service in the Seven Years' War, 
and their barrels had worn so thin with constant polishing that 
the use of full charges at target practice had been forbidden. 
Above all, the army had drifted entirely out of touch with the 
civil population. The latter, ground down by feudal tradition and 
law, -and at the same time permeated by the political doctrines 
of the late 18th century, believed that war concerned the govern- 
ments only, and formed no part of the business of the " honest 
citizen." In this idea they were supported by the law itself, 
which protected the civilian against the soldier, and forbade 
even in war-time the requisitioning of horses, provisions and 
transport, without payment. Up to the night of the battle of 
Jena itself, the Prussian troops lay starving in the midst of plenty, 
whilst the French everywhere took what they wanted. This 
alone was a sufficient cause for all the misfortunes which followed. 

13. Outbreak of the War. — During the campaign of Austerlitz 
Prussia, furious at the violation of her territory of Anspach, 
had mobilized, and had sent Haugwitz as ambassador to 
Napoleon's headquarters. He arrived on the 30th of November, 
and Napoleon, pleading business, put off his official reception 
till after the battle of Austerlitz. Of course the ultimatum was 
never presented, as may be imagined; Haugwitz returned and 
the king of Prussia demobilized at once. But Napoleon, well 
knowing the man he had to deal with, had determined to force 
a quarrel upon Prussia at the earliest convenient opportunity. 
His troops therefore, when withdrawn from Austria, were can- 
toned in south Germany in such a way that, whilst suspicion 
was not aroused in minds unacquainted with Napoleonic methods, 
they could be concentrated by a few marches behind the 
Thuringian forest and the upper waters of the Main. Here the 
Grand Army was left to itself to recuperate and assimilate its 
recruits, and it is characteristic of the man and his methods 
that he did not trouble his corps commanders with a single 
order during the whole of the spring and summer. 

As the diplomatic crisis approached, spies were sent into 
Prussia, and simultaneously with the orders for preliminary con- 
centration the marshals received private instructions, the pith 
of which cannot be better expressed than in the following two 
quotations from Napoleon's correspondence: — 

" Mon intention est de concentrer toutes mes forces sur Textr6mit6 
de ma droite en laissant tout Tespace entre le Rhin et Bamberg 
entierement degarni, de maniere a avoir pres de 200,000 horn mes 
reunis sur un meme champ de bataille; mes premieres marches 
'menacent le coeur de la monarchic prussienne " (No. 10,920). 
" Avec cette immense sup€riorite de forces reunis sur un espace si 
etroit, vous sentez gue je suis dans la volont6 de ne rien hasarder et 
d'attaquer Tenncmi partout ou il voudra tenir. Vous pensez bien 
que ce serait une belle affaire que de se porter sur cette place (Dresden) 
en un bataitlon carrb de 200,000 homtnes " (Soult, No. 10,941). 

14. Advance of the Grande Armte. — On the 7th of October 
the Grande Armte lay in three parallel columns along the roads 
leading over the mountains to Hof, Schleiz and Kronach; 
on the right lay the IV. corps (Soult) about Bayreuth; with his 
cavalry in rear, and behind these the VI. corps (Ney) at Pegnitz; 
in the centre, Bernadotte's I. corps from Nordhalben, with the 

III. corps (Davout) Lichtenfels; Guard and headquarters, 
Bamberg. The left column was composed of the V. (Lannes) 
at Hemmendorf, with the VII. (Augereau) extending south to 
the Main at Burgebrach. 

Napoleon's object being surprise, all the cavalry except a 
few vedettes were kept back behind the leading infantry columns 
and these latter were ordered to advance, on the signal being 
given, in " masses of manoeuvre," so as to crush at once any 
outpost resistance which was calculated upon the time required 
for the deployment of ordinary marching columns. This order 
has never since found an imitator, but deserves attentive study 
as a masterpiece (see H. Bonnal, Manoeuvre d'Hna). 

To meet the impending blow the Prussians had been extended 
in a cordon along the great road leading from Mainz to Dresden, 
Blucher was at Erfurt, Riichel at Gotha, Hohenlohe at Weimar, 
Saxons in Dresden, with outposts along the frontier. An 
offensive move into Franconia was under discussion, and for 
'this purpose the Prussian staff had commenced a lateral con- 
centration about Weimar, Jena and Naumburg when the storm 
burst upon them. The emperor gathered little from the confused 
reports of their purposeless manoeuvres, but, secure in the midst 
of his " battalion square " of 200,000 men, he remained quite 
indifferent, well knowing that an advance straight on Berlin 
must force his enemy to concentrate and fight, and as they 
would bring at most 127,000 men on to the battlefield the 
result could hardly be doubtful. On the 9th of October the cloud 
burst. Out of the forests which clothe the northern slopes of 
the Thuringer Wald the French streamed forth, easily over- 
powering the resistance of the Prussian outposts on the upper 
Saale, 1 and once the open country was reached the cavalry under 
Murat trotted to the front, closely followed by Bernadottc's 
corps as " general advance guard." The result of the cavalry 
scouting was however unsatisfactory. On the night of the 10th, 

	1 At the action of Saalfeld on the 10th, the young and gallant 
	Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia was killed. 

the emperor was still unaware of the position of his principal 
foe, and Murat with Bernadotte behind him was directed on 
Gera for the nth, the remainder of the army con- 
tinuing along the roads previously assigned to 
them. 

In the meanwhile, however, the Saxons had been 
moving from Naumburg through Gera on Jena, 
Hohenlohe was near Weimar, and all the other 
divisions of the army had closed in a march 
eastwards, the idea of an offensive to the south- 
ward which Napoleon had himself attributed to 
them having already disappeared. 

Reaching Gera at 9 a.m. Murat reported the 
movement of the Saxons on the previous day, 
but omitted to send a strong detachment in 
pursuit. The traces of the Saxons were lost, and 
Napoleon, little satisfied with his cavalry, author- 
ized Lasalle to offer up to 6000 frs. reward for 
information of the Prussian point of concentration. 
At 1 a.m. of the 1 2th Napoleon issued his orders. 
Murat and Bernadotte via Zeitz to Naumburg; 
Davout (III. corps and a dragoon division) also to 
Naumburg; Lannes to Jena, Augereau following; 
Soult to Gera. 

15. Prussian Movements. — In the meantime 
the Prussians were effecting their concentration. 
Riichel, who with 15,000 men had been sent into 
the mountains as an advanced guard for the pro- 
jected offensive, was recalled to Weimar, which 
he reached on the 13th. The main body were 
between Weimar and Apolda during the 12th, and 
the Saxons duly effected their junction with 
Hohenlohe in the vicinity of Vierzehnheiligen, 
whilst the latter had withdrawn his troops all but 
some outposts from Jena to the plateau about 
Capellendorf, some 4 m. to the N.W. The whole 
army, upwards of 120,000 men, could therefore have 
been concentrated against Lannes and Augereau by 
the afternoon of the 13th, whilst Soult could only 
have intervened very late in the day, and Davout and Berna- 
dotte were still too distant to reach the battlefield before the 
14th. All the French corps, moreover, were so exhausted by 
their rapid marches over bad roads that the emperor actually 
ordered (at 1 a.m. on the 13th) a day of rest for all except 
Davout, Bernadotte, Lannes and Murat. 

The Prussian headquarters, however, spent the 12th and 13th 
in idle discussion, whilst the troop commanders exerted them- 
selves to obtain some alleviation for the suffering of their 
starving men. The defeats undergone by their outpost detach- 
ment had profoundly affected the nerves of the troops, and 
on the afternoon of the nth, on the false alarm of a French 
approach, a panic broke out in the streets of Jena, and it took 
all the energy of Hohenlohe and his staff to restore order. On 
the morning of the 12th the Saxon commanding officers 
approached Hohenlohe with a statement of the famishing 
condition of their men, and threatened to withdraw them 
again to Saxony. Hohenlohe pointed out that the Prussians 
were equally badly off, but promised to do his best to help 
his allies. Urgent messages were sent off to the Commissary 
von Goethe (the poet), at Weimar for permission to requisition 
food and firewood. These requests, however, remained 
unanswered, and the Prussians and Saxons spent the night 
before the battle shivering in their miserable bivouacs. 

16. The 13th of October. — During the early morning of the 13th 
the reports brought to Napoleon at Gera partially cleared up 
the situation, though the real truth was very different from 
what he supposed. However, it was evident that the bulk of 
the Prussians lay to his left, and instructions were at once 
despatched to Davout to turn westward from Naumburg towards 
Kosen and to bring Bernadotte with him if the two were still 
together. The letter, however, ended with the words " but I 
hope he is already on his way to Dornburg." Now Bernadotte 

	Emery Walker, sc. 

had neglected to keep the emperor informed as to his where- 
abouts. He was still with Davout, but, concluding that he had 
missed an order directing him to Dornburg, he thought to conceal 
his error by assuming the receipt of the order evidently alluded 
to in the last words, and as a result he marched towards Dorn- 
hurg, and his whole corps was lost to the emperor at the crisis 
of the next day's battle. 

On the road from Gera to Jena Napoleon was met by 
intelligence from Lannes announcing his occupation of Jena and 
the discovery of Prussian troops to the northward. Knowing the 
emperor's methods, he wisely restrained the ardour of his sub- 
ordinates and asked for instructions whether to attack or wait. 
The emperor rode forward rapidly, reached Jena about 3 p.m., 
and with Lannes proceeded to the Landgrafenberg to reconnoitre. 
From this point his view was, however, restricted to the im- 
mediate foreground, and he only saw the camps of Hohenlohe's 
left wing. At this moment the Prussians were actually on 
parade and ready to move off to attack, but just then the " evil 
genius " of the Prussian army, von Massenbach, an officer of the 
Headquarter Staff, rode up and claiming to speak with the 
authority of the king and commander-in-chief, induced Hohen- 
lohe to order his troops back to camp. Of all this Napoleon 
saw nothing, but from all reports he came to the conclusion that 
the whole Prussian army was actually in front of him, and at 
once issued orders for his whole army to concentrate towards 
Jena, marching all night if need be. Six hours earlier his con- 
clusion would have been correct, but early that morning the 
Prussian headquarters, alarmed for the safety of their line of 
retreat on Berlin by the presence of the French in Naumburg, 
decided to leave Hohenlohe and Ruchel to act as rear-guard, 
and with the main body to commence their retreat towards 
the river Unstrutt and the Eckhardtsberge where Massenbach 
had previously reconnoitred an " ideal " battlefield. This belief 
in positions was the cardinal principle of Prussian strategy 
in those days. The troops had accordingly commenced their 
march on the morning of the 13th, and now at 3 p.m. were settling 
down into bivouac; they were still but a short march from the 
decisive field. 

17. Battle of Jena. — On the French side, Lannes' men were 
working their hardest, under Napoleon's personal supervision, 
to make a practicable road up to the Landgrafenberg, and all 
night long the remaining corps struggled through darkness 
towards the rendezvous. By daybreak on the 14th, the anni- 
versary of Elchingen, upwards of 60,000 men stood densely 

battalions were sent forward, and these, delaying their advance 
till the fog had sufficiently lifted, were met by French skirmishers, 
and small columns, who rapidly overlapped their flanks and 
drove them back in confusion. Hohenlohe now brought up the 
remainder of his command, but in the meanwhile the French 
had poured across the neck between the Landgrafenberg and the 
main plateau, and the troops of Soult and Augereau were working 
up the ravines on either hand. In view of these troops the 
Prussian line, which had advanced faultlessly as if on parade, 
halted to prepare its bayonet attack by fire, and, once halted, it 
was found impossible to get them to go on again. The French 
who had thrown themselves into houses, copses, &c, picked off 
the officers, and the flanks of the long Prussian lines swayed and 
got into confusion. The rival artilleries held each other too 
thoroughly to be able to spare attention to the infantry, whilst 
the Prussian cavalry, which had forgotten how to charge in 
masses of eighty or more squadrons, frittered away their strength 
in isolated efforts. By 10 a.m. the fourteen battalions which had 
initiated this attack were outnumbered by three to one, and 
drifted away from the battlefield. Their places were taken by 
a fresh body, but this was soon outnumbered and outflanked 
in its turn. By 2 p.m. the psychic moment had come, and 
Napoleon launched his guards and the cavalry to complete the 
victory and initiate the pursuit. RucheFs division now arrived 
and made a most gallant effort to cover the retreat, but their 
order being broken by the "torrent of fugitives, they were soon 
overwhelmed by the tide of the French victory and all organized 
resistance had ceased by 4 p.m. 

Briefly summarized, the battle came to this — in four successive 
efforts the Prussians failed because they were locally out- 
numbered. This was the fault of their leaders solely, for, except 
for the last attack, local superiority was in each case attainable. 
Organization and tactics did not affect the issue directly, for the 
conduct of the men and their junior officers gave abundant proof 
that in the hands of a competent leader the " linear " principle of 
delivering one shattering blow would have proved superior to that 
of a gradual attrition of the enemy here, as on the battlefields of 
the Peninsula and at Waterloo, and this in spite of other defects 
in the training of the Prussian infantry which simultaneously 
caused its defeat on the neighbouring field of Auerstadt. 

18. Battle of Auerstadt. — Here the superiority of French 
mobility, a consequence of their training and not necessarily of 
their system, showed its value most conclusively. Davout in 
obedience to his orders of the previous morning was marching 
packed on the narrow plateau of the mountain, whilst, below 
in the ravines on either flank, Soult on the right, and Augereau 
on the left, were getting into position. Fortunately a dense 
fog hid the helpless masses on the Landgrafenberg from sight of 
the Prussian gunners. Hohenlohe had determined to drive the 
French into the ravine at daybreak, but had no idea as to the 
numbers in front of him. FoT want of room, only a few Prussian 

	Mnxrj V*Ik*r tc. 

over the Saale at Kosen, when his advanced guard came in 
contact with that of the Prussian main army. The latter with 
at least 50,000 men was marching in two columns, and ought 
therefore to have delivered its men into line of battle twice as 
fast as the French, who had to deploy from a single issue, and 
whose columns had opened out in the passage of the Kosen 
defile and the long ascent of the plateau above. But the Prussians 
attacked at the old regulation speed of seventy-five paces to 
the minute, and the French manoeuvred at the quick or double 
of 1 20 or 150. The consequence was that the French always 
succeeded in reinforcing their fighting line in time to avert 
disaster. Nevertheless by mid-day their strength was well-nigh 
exhausted, whilst the Prussian reserve, eighteen battalions 
of guards under Kalckreuth, stood intact and ready to engage. 
But at the critical moment the duke of Brunswick fell mortally 
wounded, and Scharnhorst, his chief of the staff, was at the 
time absent on another part of the field. Meanwhile rumours 
from the battle-field at Jena, magnified as usual, began to 
reach the staff, and these may possibly have influenced 
Kalckreuth, for when appealed to to attack with his eighteen 
battalions and win the day, he declined to move without the 
direct order of the commander-in-chief to do so, alleging that 
it was the duty of a reserve to cover the retreat and he 
considered himself personally responsible to the king for the 
guards entrusted to his care. Even then the day might have 
been saved had Blucher been able to find even twenty squadrons 
accustomed to gallop together, but the Prussian cavalry had 
been dispersed amongst the infantry commands, and at the 
critical moment it proved impossible for them to detiver a 
united and decisive attack. 

Seeing further efforts hopeless, Scharnhorst in the duke's 
name initiated the retreat and the troops withdrew N.W. 
towards Buttelstedt, almost unmolested by the French, who 
this day had put forth all that was in them, and withstood 
victoriously the highest average punishment any troops of the 
new age of warfare had as yet endured. So desperate had been 
their resistance that the Prussians unanimously stated Davout's 
strength at double the actual figure. Probably no man but 
Davout could have got so much out of his men, but why was he 
left unsupported? 

Bernadotte, we have seen, had marched to Dornburg, or 
rather to a point overlooking the ford across the Saale at the 
village of that name, and reached there in ample time to intervene 
on either field. But with the struggle raging before him he 
remained undecided, until at Jena the decision had clearly 
fallen, and then he crossed the river and arrived with fresh 
troops too late for their services to be required. 

19. Prussian Retreat. — During the night the Prussians con- 
tinued their retreat, the bulk of the main body to Sommerda, 
Hohenlohe's corps towards Nordhausen. The troops had got 
much mixed up, but as the French did not immediately press 
the pursuit home, order was soon re-established and a combined 
retreat was begun towards the mouth of the Elbe and Liibeck. 
Here help was expected to arrive from England, and the tide 
might yet have turned, for the Russian armies were gathering 
in the east. It was now that the results of a divorce of the army 
from the nation began to be felt. Instead of seizing all provisions 
and burning what they could not remove, the Prussian generals 
enforced on their men the utmost forbearance towards the 
inhabitants, and the fact that they were obeyed, in spite of the 
inhumanity the people showed to their sick and wounded country- 
men, proves that discipline was by no means so far gone as has 
generally been believed. The French marching in pursuit were 
received with open arms, the people even turning their own 
wounded out of doors to make room for their French guests. 
Their servility awakened the bitterest contempt of their con- 
querors and forms the best excuse for the unparalleled severity 
of the French yoke. On the 26th of October Davout reached 
Berlin, having marched 166 m. in twelve days including two 
sharp rearguard actions, Bernadotte with his fresh troops having 
fallen behind. The inhabitants of Berlin, headed by their mayor, 
came out to meet him, and the newspapers lavished adulation 
on the victors and abuse on the beaten army. On the 28th 
Murat's cavalry overtook the remnant of Prince Hohenlohe's 
army near Prenzlau (N. of Berlin) and invited its capitulation. 
Unfortunately the prince sent Massenbach to discuss the situa- 
tion, and the latter completely lost his head. Murat boasted 
that he had 100,000 men behind him, and on his return Massen- 
bach implored his chief to submit to an unconditional surrender, 
advice which the prince accepted, though as a fact Murat's 
horses were completely exhausted and he had no infantry what- 
ever within call. Only Blucher now remained in the field, and he 
too was driven at length into Liibeck with his back to the sea. 

20. Campaigns in Poland and East Prussia. — Hitherto the 
French had been operating in a rich country, untouched for • 
half a century past by the ravages of war, but as the necessity 
for a campaign against the Russians confronted the emperor, 
he realized that his whole supply and transport service must 
be put on a different footing. After the wants of the cavalry 
and artillery had been provided for, there remained but little 
material for transport work. Exhaustive orders to organize 
the necessary trains were duly issued, but the emperor seems to 
have had no conception of the difficulties the tracks — there were 
no metalled roads — of Poland were about to present to him. 
Moreover, it was one thing to issue orders, but quite another 
to ensure that they were obeyed, for they entailed a complete 
transformation in the mental attitude of the French soldier 
towards all that he had been taught to consider his duties in 
the field. Experience only can teach the art of packing wagons 
and the care of draught animals, and throughout the campaign 
the small pomes of Poland and East Prussia broke down by 
thousands from over loading and unskilful packing. 

21. The Russian Army formed the most complete contrast 
to the French that .it is possible to imagine. Though clad, 
armed and organized in European fashion, the soldiers retained 
in a marked degree the traditions of their Mongolian forerunners, 
their transport wagons were in .type the survival of ages of 
experience, and their care for their animals equally the result 
of hereditary habit. The intelligence of the men and regimental 
officers was very low, but on the other hand service was practically 
for life, and the regiment the only home the great majority had 
ever known. Hence obedience was instinctive and initiative 
almost undreamt of. Moreover, they were essentially a war- 
trained army, for even in peace time their long marches to and 
fro within the empire had most thoroughly inured them to hard- 
ship and privation. Napoleon might have remembered his own 
saying, " La misere est Pecole du bon soldat." In cavalry they 
were weak, for the Russian does not take kindly to equitation 
and the horses were not equal to the accepted European standard 
of weight, while the Cossack was only formidable to stragglers 
and wounded. Their artillery was numerous and for the most 
part of heavy calibre — 18- and 24-pounders were common — but 
the strength of the army lay in its infantry, with its incomparable 
tenacity in defence and its blind confidence in the bayonet in 
attack. The traditions of Suvarov and his victories in Italy 
(see French Revolutionary Wars) were still fresh, but there 
was no longer a Suvarov to lead them. 

22. Advance to the Vistula. — Napoleon had from the first been 
aware of the secret alliance between Prussia and Russia, sworn 
by their respective sovereigns over the grave of Frederick the 
Great, and this knowledge had been his principal reason for 
precipitating hostilities with the former. He remained, however, 
in complete ignorance of the degree of preparation attained on 
the Russian side, and since the seizure of Warsaw together with 
the control of the resources of Poland in men and material its 
occupation would afford, was the chief factor in his calculation, 
he turned at once to the eastward as soon as all further organized 
resistance in Prussia was ended by the surrender of Prenzlau 
and Liibeck. Scarcely leaving his troops time to restore their 
worn-out footgear, or for the cavalry to replace their jaded 
horses from captured Prussian resources, he set Davout in motion 
towards Warsaw on the 2nd of November, and the remainder of 
the army followed in successive echelons as rapidly as they could 
be despatched. 

The cavalry, moving well in advance, dispersed the Prussian 
dep6ts and captured their horses, as far as the line of the Vistula, 
where at last they encountered organized resistance from the 
outposts of Lestocq's little corps of 15,000 men — all that was 
left of Frederick the Great's army. These, however, gave way 
before the threat of the advancing French and after a few 
trifling skirmishes. Davout entered Warsaw on the 30th of 
November, being followed by the V., IV. and Guard corps during 
the succeeding fortnight, whilst the VI. and VII. weie echeloned 
to their left, and the VIII. (Mortier) and IX. (Jerome Napoleon) 
and X. (Lefebvre), all new formations since the outbreak of 
the war, followed some marches in the rear. Jerome's corps was 
composed of the Bavarians, Wiirttembergers and Badensers. 

Behind these all Prussia was overrun by newly formed units, 
(3rd and 4th battalions) raised from depot companies, conscripts 
for 1807, and old soldiers rejoining after sickness or wounds. 
Napoleon caused these to be despatched to the front immediately 
after their formation. He had much territory to occupy, and 
in the long march of on an average 85 days, he considered that 
they could be organized, equipped and drilled en route, 

23. Pultusk. — The Russians meanwhile had been moving slowly 
forward in two bodies, one under Bennigsen (50,000), the other 
under Buxhowden (25,000), and the French being at this time 
in Warsaw, they took up threatening positions about Pultusk, 
Plock and Prassnitz. From this triangle they harried the French 
communications with Berlin, and to secure a winter's rest for 
his men Napoleon determined to bring them to action. On the 
23rd of December operations were commenced, but the difficulties 
of securing information and maintaining communication between 
the respective columns, so unlike what any of the French had 
previously encountered, led to a very partial success. The idea 
had been to induce the Russians to concentrate about Pultusk 
and, turning their position from its left, ultimately to cut them 
off from Russia, and if possible to surround them. But in this 
new and difficult country the emperor found it impossible to time 
his marches. The troops arrived late at their appointed positions, 
and after a stubborn rearguard action at Pultusk itself and 
undecisive fighting elsewhere (Soldau-Golymin) the Russians 
succeeded in retreating beyond the jaws of the French attack, 
and Napoleon for the first time found that he had exceeded the 
limit of endurance of his men. Indeed, the rank and file bluntly 
told him as much as he rode with the marching columns. Yield- 
ing to the inevitable, but not forgetting to announce a brilliant 
victory in a bulletin, he sent his troops into winter quarters 
along the Passarge and down the Baltic, enjoining on his corps 
commanders most strictly to do nothing to disturb their 
adversary. 

24. Campaign of Eylau. — Bennigsen, now commanding the 
whole Russian army which with Lestocq's Prussians amounted 

	Enter? W*lfcr» «c 

to 100,000, also moved into winter quarters in the triangle 
Deutsch-Eylau-Osterode-Allenstein, and had every intention 
of remaining there, for a fresh army was already gathering in 
Russia, the 1st corps of which had reached Nur about 50 m. 
distant from the French right. 

Unfortunately, Ney with his VI. corps about Gilgenberg had 
received the most poverty-stricken district in the whole region, 
and to secure some alleviation for the sufferings of his men he 
incautiously extended his cantonments till they came in contact 
with the Russian outposts. Apparently seeing in this movement 
a recommencement of hostilities, Bennigsen concentrated his 
troops towards his right and commenced an advance westwards 
towards Danzig, which was still in Prussian hands. Before his 
advance both Ney and Bernadotte (the latter, between Ney and 
the Baltic, covering the siege of Danzig) were compelled to fall 
back. It then became necessary to disturb the repose of the 
whole army to counter the enemy's intentions. The latter by 
this movement, however, uncovered his own communication 
with Russia, and the emperor was quick to seize his opportunity. 
He received the information on the 28th of January. His orders 
were at once issued and complied with with such celerity that 
by the 31st he stood prepared to advance with the corps of Soult, 
Ney, Davout and Augereau, the Guard and the reserve cavalry 
(80,000 men on a front of 60 m.) from Myszienec through 
Wollenberg to Gilgenberg; whilst Lannes on his right towards 
Ostrolenka and Lefebvre (X.) at Thorn covered his outer 
flanks. 

Bernadotte, however, was missing, and this time through 
no fault of his own. His orders and the despatch conveying 
Napoleon's instructions fell into the hands of the Cossacks, and 
just in time Bennigsen 's eyes were opened. Rapidly renouncing 
his previous intentions, he issued orders to concentrate on 
Allenstein; but -this point was chosen too far in advance and he 
was anticipated by Murat and Soult at that place on the 2nd of 
February. He then determined to unite his forces at Joukendorf, 
but again he was too late. Soult and Murat attacked his rear- 
guard on the 3rd, and learning from his Cossacks that the French 
corps were being directed so as to swing round and enclose him, 
he withdrew by a night march and ultimately succeeded in 
getting his whole army, with the exception of von Lestocq's 
Prussians, together in the strong position . along the Alle, the 
centre of which is marked by Preussisch-Eylau. The oppor- 
tunity for this concentration he owed to the time gained for him 
by his rearguard at Joukendorf, for this had stood just long 
enough to induce the French columns to swing in to surround 
him, and the next day was thus lost to the emperor as his corps 
had to extend again to their manoeuvring intervals. The truth 
is that the days were too short and the roads too bad for Napoleon 
to carry out the full purpose his "general advanced guard" 
was intended to fulfil. It was designed to hold the*enemy in 
position by the vigour of its attack, thus neutralizing his inde- 
pendent will power and compelling him to expend his reserves in 
the effort to rescue the troops engaged. But in forests and 
snowdrifts the French made such slow progress that no sufficient 
deployment could be made until darkness put a stop to the 
fighting. Thus, when late on the 7th of February 1807 Murat 
and Soult overtook the enemy near Eylau {q.v .) the fighting was 
severe but not prolonged. This time, however, Bennigsen, with 
over 60,000 men in position and 15,000 Prussians expected to 
arrive next morning, had no desire to avoid a battle, and deployed 
for action, his front protected by great batteries of guns, many 
of them of heavy calibre, numbering some 200 in all. 

During the night Augereau and the Guards had arrived, and 
Ney and Davout were expected on either flank in the fore- 
noon. This time the emperor was determined his enemy should 
not escape him, and about 8 a.m. ordered Soult and Augereau 
on the left and right respectively to assail the enemy, Murat 
and the Guards remaining in the centre as reserve. Napoleon's 
own forces thus became the " general advanced guard " for Ney 
and Davout, who were to close in on either side and deliver the 
decisive stroke. But here too the weather and the state of the 
roads operated adversely, for Ney came up too late, while Davout, 
in the full tide of his victorious advance, was checked by the 
arrival of Lestocq, whose corps Ney had failed to intercept, 
and the attack of Augereau's corps (VII.), made in a hlinding 
snowstorm, failed with the appalling loss of over 40% killed 
and wounded. Augereau himself was severely wounded, and the 
remnant of his corps was subsequently distributed amongst the 
other corps. Bennigsen, however, drew off on Ney's arrival, 
and the French were too much exhausted to pursue him. Again 
the emperor had to admit that his troops could do no more, and 
bowing to necessity, he distributed them into winter quarters, 
where, however, the enterprise of the Cossacks, who were no 
strangers to snow and to forests, left the outposts but little 
repose. 

A protracted period of rest followed, during which the emperor 
exerted himself unremittingly to re-equip, reinforce and supply 
his troops. Hitherto he had been based on the entrenched camp 
of Warsaw, but he had already taken steps to organize a new line 
of supply and retreat via Thorn, and this was now completed. 
At the same time Lefebvre was ordered to press the siege of 
Danzig with all vigour, and on the 5th of May, after a most 
gallant resistance, Kalckreuth, who redeemed here his failure of 
Auerstadt, surrendered. English assistance came too late. 
By the beginning of June the French had more than made good 
their losses and 210,000 men were available for field service. 

25. Heilsberg and Friedland. — Meanwhile Bennigsen had 
prepared for a fresh undertaking, and leaving Lestocq with 
20,000 Prussians and Russians to contain Bernadotte, who lay 
between Braunsberg and Spandau on the Passarge, he moved 
southwards on the 2nd, and on the 3rd and 4th of June he fell 
upon Ney, driving him back towards Guttstadt, whilst with the 
bulk of his force he moved towards Heilsberg, where he threw 
up an entrenched position. It was not till the 5th that Napoleon 
received tidings of his advance, and for the moment these were 
so vague that he contented himself by warning the remainder of 
his forces to be prepared to move on the 6th. Next day, however, 
all doubts were set at rest, and as the Russians advanced south 
of Heilsberg, he decided to wheel his whole force to the right, 
pivoting on the III. corps, arid cut Bennigsen off from Konigsberg 
and the sea. On the 8th the VI., III., VIII. and Guard corps, 
together with a new cavalry reserve corps under Lannes, in all 
147,000, stood ready for the operation, and with Murat and 
Soult as general advanced guard the whole moved forward, 
driving the Russian outposts before them. Bernadotte, who was 
to have attacked Lestocq, again failed to receive his orders and 
took no part in the following operations. 

Murat attacked the Russians, who had halted in their 
entrenched position, on the nth and drove in their outposts, 
but did not discover the entrenchments. Meanwhile Soult 
had followed with his infantry in close support, and the emperor 
himself arriving, ordered him to attack at once. Now the 
Russians uncovered their entrenchments, and in the absence of 
artillery preparation Soult's leading troops received most severe 
punishment. Fresh troops arriving were sent in to his support, 
but these also proved insufficient, and darkness alone put an 
end to the struggle, which cost the French 12,000 killed and 
wounded. 

Bennigsen, however, learning that his right was threatened by 
the III. corps, and not having as yet completed his concentration, 
retreated in the night to Bartenstein, and the following day 
turned sharp to right towards Schippenbeil. The emperor 
now pressed on towards Friedland, where he would completely 
control the Russian communications with Konigsberg, their 
immediate base of supply, but for once the Russians outmarched 
him and covered their movement so successfully that for the 
next three days he seems to have completely lost all knowledge 
of his enemy's whereabouts. Lestocq in the meantime had been 
forced northwards towards Konigsberg, and Soult with Murat 
was in hot pursuit. The III., VL, VIII. and Guard corps followed 
the main road towards Konigsberg, and the former had reached 
Muhlhausen, the remainder were about Preussisch-Eylau, 
when Latour Maubourg's dragoons sent in intelligence which 
pointed to the presence of Bennigsen about Friedland. This 
was indeed the case. The Russians after passing Schippenbeil 
had suddenly turned northwards, and on the evening of the 
13th were taking up a strong position on the river Alle with 
Friedland as a centre. 

What followed presents perhaps the finest instance of the 
Napoleonic method. The enemy lay direct to his right, and 
Murat, the IV. and III. corps had well overshot the mark. 
Lannes's reserve corps (cavalry), to whom Latour Maubourg 
reported, lay at Domnau some 10 m. to the right. The latter at 
once assumed ther61e of advanced guard cavalry and was ordered 
to observe the enemy at Friedland, Ney following in close 
support. Davout was turned about and directed on the enemy's 
right, and the VIII. corps (Mortier), the Guards and the reserve 
cavalry followed as main body. On the 14th (the anniversary 
of Marengo) Lannes carried., out his rdle of fighting advanced 
guard or screen, the emperor 's^main. body gradually came up, 
and the battle of 'Friedland (q.$$, notable chiefly for the first 
display of the new artillery tactics ^of "the French, ended with 
a general attack about 5 p.m. and the retreat 'of the Russians, 
after severe losses, over the Alle. Lestocq was, meanwhile, 
driven through Konigsberg (which surrendered on the 15th) 
on Tilsit, and now that he was no longer supported by the 
Russians, the Prussian commander gave up the struggle. 

26. The Austrian Army in i8oq. — Ever since Austerlitz the 
Austrian officers had been labouring to reconstitute and reform 
their army. The archduke Charles was the foremost amongst 
many workers who had realized that numbers were absolutely 
needed to confront the new French methods. With these 
numbers it was impossible to attain the high degree of individual 
efficiency required for the old line tactics, hence they were com- 
pelled to adopt the French methods of skirmishers and columns, 
but as yet they had hardly realized the increased density 
necessary to be given to a line of battle to enable it to endure the 
prolonged nervous strain the new system of tactics entailed. 
Where formerly 15,000 men to the mile of front' had been con- 
sidered ample for the occupation of a position or the execution 
of an attack, double that number now often proved insufficient, 
and their front was broken before reinforcements could arrive. 
Much had been done to create an efficient staff, but though the 
idea of the army corps command was now no new thing, the 
senior generals entrusted with these commands were far from 
having acquired the independence and initiative of their French 
opponents. Hence the extraordinary slowness of their man- 
oeuvres, not because the Austrian infantry were bad marchers, 
but because the preparation and circulation of orders was still 
far behind the French standard. The light cavalry had been 
much improved and the heavy cavalry on the whole proved a 
fair match for their opponents. 

27. The French Army. — After. the peace of Tilsit the Grand 
Army was gradually withdrawn behind the Rhine, leaving only 
three commands, totalling 63,000 men, under Davout in Prussia, 
Oudinot in west central Germany, and Lefebvre in Bavaria, to 
assist the princes of the Confederation of the Rhine in the main- 
tenance of order and the enforcement of the French law of con- 
scription, which was rigorously insisted on in all the States 
comprised in this new federation. 

In exchange for the subsistence of the French troops of* 
occupation, a corresponding numher of these new levies were 
moved to the south of France, where they commenced to arrive 
at the moment when the situation in Spain became acute. The 
Peninsular War (q.v.) called for large forces of the old Grande 
Armie and for a brief period Napoleon directed operations in 
person; and the Austrians took advantage of the dissemination 
and weakness of the French forces in Germany to push forward 
their own preparations with renewed energy. 

But they reckoned without the resourcefulness of Napoleon. 
The moment news of their activity reached him, whilst still in 
pursuit of Sir John Moore, he despatched letters to all the 
members of the Confederation warning them that their con- 
tingents might soon be required, and at the same time issued a 
series of decrees to General Clarke, his war minister, authorizing 
him to call up the contingent of 1 810 in advance, and directing 
him in detail to proceed with the formation of 4th and 5th 
battalions for all the regiments across the Rhine. By these 
means Davout's, Oudinot's and Lefebvre's commands were 
augmented, whilst in February and March new corps were formed 
and rapidly pushed towards the front. 

On his return from Spain, seeing war imminent, he issued a 
series of march orders (which deserve the closest study in detail) 
by which on the 15th of April his whole army- was to be con- 
centrated for manoeuvres between Regensburg, Landshut, Augs- 
burg and Donauworth, and sending on the Guard in wagons to 
Strassburg, he despatched Berthier to act as commander-in-chief 
until his own arrival. 

	Emery Waiktr *c 

28. Austrian Offensive. — The position of assembly was ex- 
cellently chosen, but unfortunately the Austrians took the 
initiative. On the gth of April their main body of six corps 
crossed the Inn between Braunau and Passau, and simultane- 
ously two additional corps moved from Pilsen in Bohemia on 
Regensburg. At this moment Davout was entering Regens- 
burg with his leading troops, the remainder still some marches 
in rear, and it was evident that the whole concentration 
could no longer be carried out before the Austrians would be 
in a position to intervene. Berthier received the news while still 
on his way to the front, and quite failed to grasp the situation. 
Reaching Donauworth at 8 p.m. on the 13th of April, he ordered 
Davout and Oudinot to remain at Regensburg, whilst Lefebvre 
and Wrede (Bavarians) who had fallen back before the Austrians 
were directed to reoccupy Landshut. This was in direct contra- 
diction with the instructions Napoleon had given him on the 
28th of March in view of this very emergency. Davout obeyed, 
but remonstrated. On the 16th Berthier went on to Augsburg, 
where he learnt that Lefebvre 's advanced troops had been 
driven out of Landshut, thus opening a great gap seventy-six 
miles wide between the two wings of the French army. 
Meanwhile Napoleon, who had left Paris at 4 a.m. on the 
13th of April, was hastening towards the front, but remained 
still in ignorance of Berthier's doings until on the 16th at Stutt- 
gart he received a letter from the Marshal dated the 13th, which 
threw him into consternation. In reply he immediately wrote : 
P You do not inform me what has rendered necessary such an 
extraordinary measure which weakens and divides my troops " — 
and — " I cannot quite grasp the meaning of your letter yet, I 
should have preferred to see my army concentrated between 
Ingolstadt and Augsburg, the Bavarians in the first line, with 
the duke of Danzig in his old position, until we know what the 
enemy is going to do. Everything would be excellent if the duke 
of Auerstadt had been at Ingolstadt and the duke of Rivoli 
with the Wurttembergers and Oudinot's corps at Augsburg, 
... so that just the opposite of what should have been 
done has been done " (C. N. to Berthier, Ludwigsburg, 16th 
April). 

29. Napoleon takes command. — Having despatched this severe 
reprimand he hastened on to Donauworth, where he arrived at 
4 a.m. on the 17th, hoping to find Berthier, but the latter was at 
Augsburg. Nevertheless, at ro a.m. he ordered Davout and 
Oudinot to withdraw at once to Ingolstadt; and Lefebvre and 
Wrede on the right to support the movement. About noon 

	xix. 8 

Berthier returned and after hearing his explanation Massena 
received orders to move from Augsburg towards Ingolstadt. 
" To-morrow will be a day of preparation spent in drawing 
closer together, and I expect to be able by Wednesday to 
manoeuvre against the enemy's columns according to 
circumstances." 

Meanwhile the Austrians had approached so near that by a 
single day's march it would have been possible to fall upon and 
crush by superior numbers either wing of the French army, 
but though the Austrian light cavalry successfully covered the 
operations of the following troops they had not yet risen to a 
conception of their reconnoitring mission, and the archduke, 
in ignorance of his opportunity and possessed, moreover, with 
the preconceived idea of uniting at Regensburg with the two 
corps coming from Bohemia, moved the bulk of his forces in 
that direction, leaving only a covering body against Davout 
altogether insufficient to retain him. Davout, however, had 
left a garrison of 1800 men in Regensburg, who delayed the 
junction of the Austrian wings until the 20th hist., and on the 
same day the emperor, having now reunited his whole right 
wing and centre, overwhelmed the covering detachments 
facing him in a long series of disconnected engagements lasting 
forty-eight hours, and the archduke now found himself in danger 
of being forced back into the Danube. But with the Bohemian 
reinforcements he had still four corps in hand, and Napoleon, 
whose intelligence service in the difficult and intersected country 
had lamentably failed him, had weakened his army by detaching 
a portion of his force in pursuit of the beaten right wing, and 
against the archduke's communications. 

30. Eckmiihl. — When, therefore, the latter, on the 22nd, 
marched southward to reopen his communications by the defeat 
of the enemy's army, always the surest means of solving this 
difficulty, he actually reached the neighbourhood of Eckmiihl 
with a sufficient numerical superiority had he only been prompt 
enough to seize his opportunity. But the French had been 
beforehand with him. Napoleon, who had personally taken part 
in the fighting of the previous day, and followed the pursuit as 
far as Landshut, whence he had despatched Massena to follow 
the retreating Austrians along the Isar, seems to have realized 
about 3 a.m. in the morning that it was not the main body of 
the enemy he had had before him, but only its left wing, and that 
the main body itself must still be northward towards Regensburg. 
Issuing orders to Davout, Oudinot and his cavalry to concentrate 
with all speed towards Eckmiihl, he himself rode back along the 
Regensburg road and reached the battle-field just as the engage- 
ment between the advance troops had commenced. Had the 
Austrians possessed mobility equal to that of the French the 
latter should have been overwhelmed in detail, but whilst the 
French covered 17 and 19 m. the Austrians only marched 10, 
and, owing to the defect in their tactical training alluded to above, 
the troops actually on the ground could not hold out long enough 
for their reserves to arrive. The retreat of the front lines 
involved the following ones in confusion, and presently the 
whole mass was driven back in considerable disorder. It 
seemed as if nothing " could save the Austrians from complete 
disaster, but at the critical moment the emperor, yielding to 
the protestations of his corps commanders, who represented the 
excessive fatigue of their troops, stopped the pursuit, and the 
archduke made the most of his opportunity to restore order 
amongst his demoralized men, and crossed to the north bank 
of the Danube during the night. 

31. Austrian Retreat. — On the following morning the French 
reached Regensburg and at once proceeded to assault its 
medieval walls, but the Austrian garrison bravely defended it 
till the last of the stragglers was safely across on the north bank. 
It was here that for the only time in his career Napoleon was 
slightly wounded. Then, leaving Davout to observe the archduke's 
retreat, the emperor himself rode after Massena, who with the 
major portion of the French army was following the Austrian 
weaker wing under Hiller. The latter was not so shaken as 
Napoleon believed, and turning to bay inflicted a severe check 
on its pursuers, who at Ebelsberg lost 4000 men in three 
fruitless assaults. Thus covered by his rearguard Hiller gained 
space and time to pass his troops over to the north bank of the 
Danube and remove all boats on the river. This left the direct 
road to Vienna open, and Napoleon, hoping to find peace in the 
enemy's capital, pushed the whole of his army down the right 
bank, and with Murat's cavalry entered the city on the 12th of 
May, after somewhat severe resistance lasting three days. Mean- 
while the archduke and Hiller, both now unmolested, effected 
their junction in the vicinity of Wagram, picketing the whole line 
of the Danube with their outposts and collecting all the boats. 

32. Aspern and Wagram. — The reconnaissance of the river 
was at once taken in hand by the French upon their arrival 
in Vienna, and a point opposite the island of Lobau selected 
for the crossing. Thanks to the Austrian precautions it took 
four days to collect the necessary material to span the main 
branch of the river, here some 2000 yds. across, and though 
Napoleon personally spurred on all to activity nearly four days 
more were required for its construction. It was not till the night 
of the 19th of May that orders for the passage were finally issued, 
and during the night the troops commenced to occupy the island 
of Lobau. Surprise, of course, was out of the question, but the 
Austrians did not attempt to dispute the passage, their object 
being to allow as many French as they felt they could deal with 
to pass over and then to fall on them. Thus on the 21st of 
May the battle of Aspern (q.v.) or Essling began. It ended on 
the night of the 22nd with the complete defeat of Napoleon, 
the first ever inflicted upon him. The French retreated into the 
island of Lobau. By nightfall upwards of 100,000 men, en- 
cumbered with at least 20,000 wounded, were crowded together 
on the little island scarcely a mile square, short of provisions 
and entirely destitute of course of all hospital accessories. The 
question then arose whether the retreat was to be continued 
across the main stream or not, and for the second time in his 
career Napoleon assembled his generals to take their opinion. 
They counselled retreat, but having heard them all he replied, 
in substance: " If we leave here at all we may as well retire to 
Strassburg, for unless the enemy is held by the threat of further 
operations he will be free to strike at our communications and 
has a shorter distance to go. We must remain here and renew 
operations as soon as possible." 

Immediate orders were despatched to summon every available 
body of troops to concentrate for the decisive stroke. Practically 
the lines of communication along the Danube were denuded 
of combatants, even Bernadotte being called up from Passau, 
and the viceroy of Italy, who driving the archduke Johann before 
him (action of Raab) had brought up 56,000 men through 
Tirol, was disposed towards Pressburg within easy call. The 
arsenal of Vienna was ransacked for guns, stores and appliances, 
and preparations in the island pushed on as fast as possible. 
By the end of June 200,000 troops were stationed within call, 
and on the 4th July the French began to cross over to the left 
bank of the Danube. The events which followed are described 
under Wagram. The great battle at this place, fought on the 
5th and 6th of July, ended in the retirement of the Austrians. 
The only other event which occurred before peace was made 
was an unimportant action at Znaym on the nth of July. 

33. The Russian War of 1812. — Whilst the campaign of 1800 
had seriously shaken the faith of the marshals and the higher 
ranks in the infallibility of the emperor's judgment, and the 
slaughter of the troops at Aspern and Wagram had still further 
accentuated the opposition of the French people to conscription, 
the result on the fighting discipline of the army had, on the 
whole, been for good. The panics of Wagram had taught men 
and officers alike a salutary lesson. 

Aware of the growing feeling against war in France, Napoleon 
had determined to make his allies not only bear the expenses of 
the coming campaign, but find the men as well, and he was 
so far master of Europe that of the 363,000 who on the 24th of 
June crossed the Niemen no less than two-thirds were Germans, 
Austrians, Poles or Italians. But though the battlefield discipline 
of the men was better, the discipline in camp and on the march 
was worse, for the troops were no longer eager to reach the 
battlefield, and marched because they were compelled, not of 
their own goodwill. The result was apparent in a sudden 
diminution in mobility, and a general want of punctuality 
which in the event very seriously influenced the course of the 
campaign. On the other hand, the Russians, once their father- 
land was invaded, became dominated by an ever-growing spirit 
of fanaticism, and they were by nature too obedient to their 
natural leaders, and too well inured to the hardships of cam- 
paigning, to lose their courage in a retreat. 

34. The Strategic Deployment. — By the middle of June 1812 
the emperor had assembled his army along the line of the Niemen. 
On " the extreme right stood the Austrian contingent under 
Schwarzenberg (34,000 men). Next, centring about Warsaw, 
a group of three corps (19,000 men) under the chief command 
of Napoleon's brother Jerome. Then the main army under 
Napoleon in person (220,000 men; with 80,000 more under the 
viceroy of Italy on his right rear); and on the extreme left at 
Tilsit a flanking corps, comprising the Prussian auxiliary corps 
and other Germans (in all 40,000 strong). The whole army 
was particularly strong in cavalry; out of the 450,000, So,ooo 
belonged to that arm, and Napoleon, mindful of the lessons of 
1807, had issued the most minute and detailed orders for the 
supply service in all its branches, and the forwarding of reinforce- 
ments, no less than 100,000 men being destined for that purpose 
in due course of time. 

Information about the Russians was very indifferent; it was 
only known that Prince Bagration with about 33,000 men lay 
grouped about Wolkowysk; Barclay de Tolly with 40,000 about 
Vilna; and on the Austrian frontier lay a small corps under 
Tormassov in process of formation, while far away on the Turkish 
frontiers hostilities with the sultan retained Tschitschagov with 
50,000 more. Of the enemy's plans Napoleon knew nothing, 
but, in accordance with his usual practice, the position he had 
selected met all immediate possible moves. 

35. Opening of the Campaign. — On the 24th of June the passage 
of the Niemen began in torrid heat which lasted for a few days. 
The main army, with the emperor in person, covered hy Murat 
and the cavalry, moved on Vilna, whilst Jerome on his right rear 
at once threatened Bagration and covered the emperor's outer 
flank. From the very first, however, the inherent weakness of 
the vast army, and the vicious choice of time for the beginning 
of the advance, began to make itself felt. The crops being still 
green, and nothing else available as forage for the horses, an 
epidemic of colic broke out amongst them, and in ten days the 
mounted arms had lost upwards of one-third of their strength; 
men died of sunstroke in numbers, and serious straggling began. 
Still everything pointed to the concentration of the Russians at 
Vilna, and Jerome, who on the 5th of July had reached Grodno, 
was ordered to push on. But Jerome proved quite inadequate 
to his position, listening to the complaints of his subordinates as 
to want of supplies and even of pay; he spent four whole days 
in absolute inertia, notwithstanding the emperor's reprimands. 
Meanwhile the Russians made good their retreat — Barclay to- 
wards the entrenched camp of Drissa on the Dvina, Bagration 
towards Mohilev. 

The emperor's first great coup thus failed. Jerome was 
replaced by Davout, and the army resumed its march, this time 
in the hope of surrounding and overwhelming Barclay, whilst 
Davout dealt with Bagration. The want of mobility, particularly 
in the cavalry, now began to tell against the French. With horses 
only just recovering from an epidemic, they proved quite unequal 
to the task of catching the Cossacks, who swarmed round them 
in every direction, never accepting an engagement but compelling 
a constant watchfulness for which nothing in their previous 
experience had sufficiently prepared the French. 

Before their advance, however, the Russian armies steadily 
retired, Barclay from Vilna via Drissa to Vitebsk, Bagration 
from Wolkowysk to Mohilev. Again arrangments were made 
for a Napoleonic battle; behind Murat 's cavalry came the 
" general advanced guard " to attack and hold the enemy, whilst 
the main body and Davout were held available to swing in on 
his rear. Napoleon, however, failed to allow for the psychology 
of his opponents, who, utterly indifferent to the sacrifice of life, 
refused to be drawn into engagements to support an advance 
or to extricate a rearguard, and steadily withdrew from every 
position when the French gained touch with them. 

Thus the manoeuvre against Vitebsk again miscarried, and 
Napoleon found himself in a far worse position, numerically and 
materially, " than at the outset of the campaign. Then he had 
stood with 420,000 men on a front of 160 m., now he had only 
229,000 men on a front of 135; he had missed three great 
opportunities of destroying hi? enemy in detail, and in five weeks, 
during which time he had only traversed 200 m., he had seen his 
troops reduced numerically at least one-third, and, worse still, 
his army was now far from being the fighting machine it had been 
at the outset. 

$6. Smolensk, — Meanwhile the Russians had not lost a single 
gun and the moral of their men had been improved .by the result 
of the many minor encounters with the enemy; further, the 
and then began a series of rearguard actions and nocturnal 
retreats which completely accomplished their purpose of wearing 
down the French army. The Russian government, however, 
failed to see the matter in its true light, and Marshal Kutusov 
was sent to the front to assume the chief command. His inten- 
tion was to occupy a strong position and fight one general action 
for the possession of Moscow, and to this end he selected the line of 
the Kalatscha where the stream intersects the great Moscow road. 
37. Borodino. — Here he was overtaken by Murat and Ney, but 
the French columns had straggled so badly that four whole days 
elapsed before the emperor was able to concentrate his army for 
battle and then could only oppose 128,000 men to the Russians 7 
110,000. About 6 a.m. the battle began, but Napoleon was 
suffering from one of those attacks of illness and depression 
which henceforth became such an important factor in his fate. 
Till about midday he followed the course of the action with his 
usual alertness; then he appears to have been overcome by a 
junction of Bagration and Barclay was now assured in the vicinity 
of Smolensk. Towards this place the French advance was now 
resumed, and the Russian generals at the head of a united force 
of 130,000 men marched forward to meet them. Here, however, 
the inefficiency of the Russian staff actually saved them from 
the disaster which must certainly have overtaken them had they 
realized their intention of fighting the French. The Russians 
marched in two columns, which lost touch of one another, and 
as it was quite impossible for either to engage the French single- 
handed, they both retired again towards Smolensk, where with 
an advanced guard in the town itself — which possessed an old- 
fashioned brick enceinte not to be breached by field artillery alone 
— the two columns reunited and deployed for action behind the 
unfordable Dnieper. 

Murat and Ney as " general advanced guard " attacked the 
town in the morning of the 16th of August, and whilst they 
fought the main body was swung round to attack the Russian 
left and rear. The whole of the 1 7th was required to complete the 
movement, and as soon as its purpose was sufficiently revealed 
to the Russians the latter determined to retreat under cover of 
night. Their manoeuvre was carried out with complete success, 
kind of stupor and allowed his marshals to fight by themselves. 
There was no final decisive effort as at Wagram and the Guard 
was not even called on to move. Ultimately the sun went down 
on an undecided field on which 25,000 French and 38,000 Russians 
had fallen, but the moral reaction on the former was far greater 
than on the latter. 

38. Moscow. — Kutusov continued his retreat, and Murat 
with his now exhausted horsemen followed as best he might. 
Sebastiani, commanding the advanced guard, overtook the 
Russians in the act of evacuating Moscow, and agreed with the 
latter to observe a seven hours' armistice to allow the Russians to 
clear the town, for experience had shown the French that street 
fighting in wooden Russian townships always meant fire and the 
consequent destruction of much-needed shelter and provisions. 
Towards nightfall Napoleon reached the scene, and the Russians 
being now clear the troops began to enter, but already fires were 
observed in the farther part of the city. Napoleon passed the 
night in a house in the western suburb and next morning rode 
to the Kremlin, the troops moving to the quarters assigned 
to them, but in the afternoon a great fire began and, continuing 
for two days, drove the French out into the country again. 

The emperor was now in the direst perplexity. Kutusov was 
hovering on the outskirts of the city, his main body at Kaluga, 
some marches to the S.W., where he was in full communication 
with the richest portion of the empire; and now news arrived 
that St. Cyr, who had relieved Macdonald on his extreme left, 
had only 17,000 men left under arms against upwards of 40,000 
Russians under Witgenstein; and to the south Tschitschagov's 
army, being no longer detained on the Turkish frontier, peace 
having been made, was marching to join Tormassov about 
B rest-Li tewski with forces which would bring the total of the 
two well over 100,000 men. Meanwhile Schwarzenberg's force 
opposing these had dwindled to a bare 30,000. 

The French army was thus disposed almost in an equilateral 
triangle with sides of about 570 m., with 95,000 men at the apex 
at Moscow opposed to 120,000, 30,000 about Brest opposite 
100,000, and 17,000 about Drissa confronted by 40,000, whilst in 
the centre of the base at Smolensk lay Victor's corps, about 
30,000. From Moscow to the Niemen was 550 m. In view of 
this situation Napoleon on the 4th of October sent General 
Lauriston to the Russian headquarters to treat. Whilst waiting 
his return Murat was enjoined to skirmish with Kutusov, and 
the emperor himself worked out a scheme to assume the offensive 
with his whole army towards St Petersburg, calling in Victor and 
St Cyr on the way. This project was persisted with, until on the 
1 8th Murat was himself attacked and severely handled (action 
of Tarutino or Vinkovo). On the morning of the 19th the whole 
army moved out to accept this challenge, and the French were 
thoroughly worsted on the 24th in the battle of Maloyaroslavetz. 

39. The Retreat from Moscow. — Then began the celebrated 
retreat. It has generally been forgotten that the utter want 
of march discipline in the French, and not the climatic condi- 
tions, was responsible for the appalling disasters which ensued. 
Actually the frost came later than usual that year, the 27th of 
October, and the weather was dry and bracing; not till the 8th 
of November did the cold at night become sharp. Even when the 
Beresina was reached on the 26th November, the cold was far from 
severe, for the slow and sluggish stream was not frozen over, as is 
proved by the fact that Eble's pioneers worked in the water all 
through that terrible day. But the French army was already com- 
pletely out of hand, and the degree to which the panic of a crowd 
can master even the strongest instinct of the individual is shown 
by the conduct of the fugitives who crowded over the bridges, 
treading hundreds under foot, whilst all the time the river was 
easily fordable and mounted men rode backwards and forwards 
across it. 

To return to. the actual sequence of events. Kutusov had 
been very slow in exploiting his success of the 24th and indeed 
had begun the pursuit in a false direction; but about the 2nd of 
November, headquarters of the French being at Vyazma, the 
Cossacks became so threatening that the emperor ordered the 
army to march (as in Egypt) in hollow square. This order, 
however, appears only to have been obeyed by the Guards, with 
whom henceforward the emperor marched. 

Kutusov had now overtaken the French, but fortunately for 
them he made no effort to close with them, but hung on their 
flank, molesting them with Cossacks and picking up stragglers. 
Thus the wreck of the Grande Amite, now not more than 
fifty thousand strong, reached Smolensk on the 9th and 
there rested till the 14th, The march was then resumed, the 
Guard leading and Ney commanding the rearguard. Near 
Krasnoi on the 16th the Russian advanced guard tried to head 
the column off. Napoleon halted a whole day to let the army 
close up; and then attacked with his old vigour and succeeded 
in clearing the road, but only at the cost of leaving Ney and the 
rearguard to its fate. By a night march of unexampled daring 
and difficulty Ney succeeded in breaking through the Russian 
cordon, but when he regained touch with the main body at 
Orcha only 800 of his 6000 men were still with him (21st). 

40. The Beresina. — From here Napoleon despatched orders 
to Victor to join him at Borisov on the Beresina. The cold now 
gave way and thaw set in, leaving the country a morass, and 
Information came that Tschitschagov from the south had reached 
Borisov. He now selected Viesselovo as the point of passage and 
at 1 a.m. on the 23rd sent orders to Oudinot to march thither 
and construct bridges. In the execution of these orders Oudinot 
encountered the Russian advanced guard near Borisov and 
drove the latter back in confusion, though not before they had 
destroyed the existing bridge there. This sudden reassumption 
of the offensive threw Tschitschagov into confusion. Thus time 
was gained for Victor also to come up and for Oudinot to con- 
struct the bridges at Studienka near the above-mentioned 
place, but a spot in many respects better suited for the purpose. 
Thither therefore Napoleon sent his pontonniers under General 
Eble, but on their arrival they found that no preparations had 
been made and much time was lost. Meanwhile Victor, in doubt 
as to the real point of passage, had left the road to Studienka 
open to Wittgenstein, who had followed hard on his heels. 

By 4 p.m. on the 26th the bridges were finished and the passage 
began, but not without resistance by the Russians, who were 
gradually closing in. The crossing continued all night, though 
interrupted from time to time by failures of the bridges. All 
day during the 27th stragglers continued to cross, covered by 
such combatants as remained under sufficient discipline to be 
employed. At 8 a.m. on the 28th, however, Tschitschagov and 
Wittgenstein moved forward on both banks of the river to the 
attack, but were held off by the splendid self-sacrifice of the few 
remaining troops under Ney, Oudinot and Victor, until about 
1 p.m. the last body of regular troops passed over the bridges, 
and only a few thousand stragglers remained beyond the river. 

The number of troops engaged by the French that day cannot 
be given exactly. Oudinot's and Victor's men were relatively 
fresh and may have totalled 20,000, whilst Ney can hardly have 
had more than 6000 of all corps fighting under him. How many 
were killed can never be known, but three days later the total 
number of men reported fit for duty had fallen to 8800 only. 

41. Final Operations. — Henceforward the retreat of the army 
became practically a headlong flight, and on the 5th of December, 
having reached Smorgoni and seeing that nothing further could 
be done by him at the front, the emperor handed over the 
command of what remained to Murat, and left for Paris to 
organize a fresh army for the following year. Travelling at 
the fullest speed, he reached the Tuileries on the 18th, after a 
journey of 312 hours. 

After the emperor's departure the cold set in with increased 
severity, the thermometer falling to 23 . On the 8th of December 
Murat reached Vilna, whilst Ney with about 400 men and Wrede 
with 2000 Bavarians still formed the rearguard; but it was quite 
impossible to carry out Napoleon's instructions to go into 
winter quarters about the town, so that the retreat was resumed 
on the 10th and ultimately Konigsberg was attained on the 
19th of December by Murat with 400 Guards and 600 Guard 
cavalry dismounted. 

Meanwhile on the extreme French right Schwarzenberg and 
his Austrians had drifted away towards their own frontier, 
and the Prussian contingent, which under Yorck (see Yorck 
von Wartenburg) formed part of Macdonald's command 
about Riga, had entered into a convention with the Russians 
at Tauroggen (December 30) which deprived the French of their 
last support upon their left. Konigsberg thus became untenable, 
and Murat fell back to Posen, where on the 10th of January 
he handed over his command to Eugene Beauharnais and 
returned to Paris. 

The Russian pursuit practically ceased at the line of the 
Niemen, for their troops also had suffered terrible hardships 
and a period of rest had become an absolute necessity. 

42. The War of Liberation. — The Convention of Tauroggen 
became the starting-point of Prussia's regeneration. As the 
news of the destruction of the Grande Arntfe spread, and the 
appearance of countless stragglers convinced the Prussian people 
of the reality of the disaster, the spirit generated by years of 
French domination burst out. For the moment the king and his 
ministers were placed in a position of the greatest anxiety, for 
they knew the resources of France and the boundless versatility 
of their arch-enemy far too well to imagine that the end of their 
sufferings was yet in sight. To disavow the acts and desires of 
the army and of the secret societies for defence with which all 
north Germany was honeycombed would be to imperil the very 
existence of the monarchy, whilst an attack on the wreck of 
the Grand Army meant the certainty of a terrible retribution 
from the new armies now rapidly forming on the Rhine. 

But the Russians and the soldiers were resolved to continue 
the campaign, and working in collusion they put pressure on 
the not unwilling representatives of the civil power to facilitate 
the supply and equipment of such troops as were still in the field; 
they could not refuse food and shelter to their starving country- 
men or their loyal allies, and thus by degrees the French garrisons 
scattered about the country either found themselves surrounded 
or were compelled to retire to avoid that fate. Thus it happened 
that the viceroy of Italy felt himself compelled to depart from 
the positive injunctions of the emperor to hold on at all costs 
to his advanced position at Posen, where about 14,000 men 
had gradually rallied around him, and to withdraw step by step . 
to Magdeburg, where he met reinforcements and commanded 
the whole course of the lower Elbe. 

43. Napoleon's Preparations. — Meanwhile the emperor in 
Paris had been organizing a fresh army for the reconquest of 
Prussia. Thanks to his having compelled his allies to fight his 
battles for him, he had not as yet drawn very heavily on the 
fighting resources of France, the actual percentage of men taken 
by the conscriptions during the years since 1806 being actually 
lower than that in force in continental armies of to-day. He 
had also created in 1811-1812 a new National Guard, organized 
in " cohorts " to distinguish it from the regular army, and for 
home defence only, and these by a skilful appeal to their patriotism 
and judicious pressure applied through the prefects, became a 
useful reservoir of half-trained men for new battalions of the 
active army. Levies were also made with rigorous severity 
in the states of the Rhine Confederation, and even Italy was 
called on for fresh sacrifices. In this manner by the end of 
March upwards of 200,000 men were moving towards the Elbe, 1 
und in the first fortnight of April they were duly concentrated 
in the angle formed by the Elbe and Saale, threatening on the 
one hand Berlin, on the other Dresden and the east. 

44. Spring Campaign of 18 13. — The allies, aware of the gradual 
strengthening of their enemy's forces but themselves as yet 
unable to put more than 200,000 in the field, had left a small 
corps of observation opposite Magdeburg and along the Elbe 
to give timely notice of an advance towards Berlin; and with 
the bulk of their forces had taken up a position about Dresden, 
whence they had determined to march down the course of the 
Elbe and roll up the French from right to left. Both armies 
were very indifferently supplied with information, as both were 
without any reliable regular cavalry capable of piercing the 
screen of outposts with which each endeavoured to conceal 
his disposition, and Napoleon, operating in a most unfriendly 
country, suffered more in this respect than his adversaries. 

On the 25th of April Napoleon reached Erfurt and assumed 
the chief command. On this day his troops stood in the following 
positions. Eugene, with Lauriston's, Macdonald's and Regnier's 
corps, on the lower Saale, Ney in front of Weimar, holding the 
defile of Kosen; the Guard at Erfurt, Marmont at Gotha, 
Bertrand at Saalfeld, and Oudinot at Coburg, and during the 
next few days the whole were set in motion towards Merseburg 
and Leipzig, in the now stereotyped Napoleonic order, a strong 
advanced guard of all arms leading, the remainder — about two- 
thirds of the whole — following as " masse de manoeuvre," this 
time, owing to the cover afforded by the Elbe on the left, to the 
right rear of the advanced guard. 

Meanwhile the Russians and Prussians had concentrated all 
available men and were moving on an almost parallel line, but 
somewhat to the south of the direction taken by the French. 
On the 1 st of May Napoleon and the advanced guard entered 
Lutzen. Wittgenstein, who now commanded the allies in place 
of Kutusov, hearing of his approach, had decided to attack 

	1 Napoleon always gave them out as 300,000, but this number 
	was never attained. 

the French advanced guard, which he took to be their whole 
force, on its right flank, and during the morning had drawn 
together the bulk of his forces on his right in the vicinity of Gross- 
Gorschen and Kaya. 

45. Battle of L&tzen. — About 9 a.m. on May 2nd he began an 
attack on the French advance guard in Lutzen, whilst the 
remainder of his army was directed against Napoleon's right 
and rear. Just as the latter were moving off the heads of the 
French main body suddenly appeared, and at 11 a.m. Napoleon, 
then standing near the Gustavus Adolphus monument on the 
field of Lutzen, heard the roar of a heavy cannonade to his right 
rear. He realized the situation in a moment, galloped to the 
new scene of action, and at once grouped his forces for decisive 
action — the gift in which he was supreme. Leaving the leading 
troops to repulse as best they might the furious attack of both 
Russians and Prussians, and caring little whether they lost 
ground, he rapidly organized for his own control a battle-reserve. 
At length when both sides were exhausted by their efforts he 
sent forward nearly a hundred guns which tore asunder by their 
case-shot fire the enemy's line and marched his reserve right 
through the gap. Had he possessed an adequate cavalry force 
the victory would have been decisive. As it was, the allies made 
good their retreat and the French were too exhausted for infantry 
pursuit. 

Perhaps no battle better exemplifies the inherent strength of 
the emperor's strategy, and in none was his grasp of the battlefield 
more brilliantly displayed, for, as he. fully recognized, "These 
Prussians have at last learnt something — they are no longer the 
wooden toys of Frederick the Great," and, on the other hand, 
the relative inferiority of his own men as compared with his 
veterans of Austerlitz called for far more individual effort than 
on any previous day. He was everywhere, encouraging and 
compelling his men — it is a legend in the French army that the 
persuasion even of the imperial boot was used upon some of his 
reluctant conscripts, and in the result his system was fully 
justified, as it triumphed even against a great tactical surprise. 

46. Bautzen. — As soon as possible the army pressed on in 
pursuit, Ney being sent across the Elbe to turn the position of the 
allies at Dresden. This threat forced the latter to evacuate the 
town and retire over the Elbe, after blowing up the stone bridge 
across the river. Napoleon entered the town hard on their heels, 
but the broken bridge caused a delay of four days, there being no 
pontoon trains with the army. Ultimately on the 1 8th of May the 
march was renewed, but the allies had continued their retreat in 
leisurely fashion, picking up reinforcements by the way. Arrived 
at the line of the Spree, they took up and fortified a very formid- 
able position about Bautzen (q.v.). Here, on the 20th, they were 
attacked, and after a two days' battle dislodged by Napoleon; 
but the weakness of the French cavalry conditioned both the 
form of the attack, which was less effective than usual, and the 
results of the victory, which were extremely meagre. 

The allies broke off the action at their own time and retired 
in such good order that the emperor failed to capture a single 
trophy as proof of his victory. The enemy's escape annoyed him 
greatly, the absence of captured guns and prisoners reminded 
him too much of his Russian experiences, and he redoubled his 
demands on his corps commanders for greater vigour in the 
pursuit. This led the latter to push on without due regard to 
tactical precautions, and Bliicher took advantage of their 
carelessness when at Haynau (May 26), with some twenty 
squadrons of Landwehr cavalry, he surprised, rode over and 
almost destroyed Maison's division. The material loss inflicted 
on the French was not very great, but its effect in raising the 
moral of the raw Prussian cavalry and increasing their con- 
fidence in their old commander was enormous. 

Still the allies continued their retreat and the French were 
unable to bring them to action. In view of the doubtful attitude 
of Austria, Napoleon became alarmed at the gradual lengthening 
of his lines of communication and opened negotiations. The 
enemy, having everything to gain and nothing to lose thereby, 
agreed finally to a six weeks' suspension of arms. This was 
perhaps the gravest military error of Napoleon's whole career, 
and his excuse for it, " want of adequate cavalry," is the strongest 
testimony as to the value of that arm. 

47. The Autumn Campaign. — As soon as a suspension of arms 
(to 15th of August) had been agreed to, Napoleon hastened to 
withdraw his troops from the dangerous position they occupied 
with reference to the passes leading over the mountains from 
Bohemia, for he entertained no doubt now that Austria was also 
to be considered as an enemy. Finally he decided to group his 
corps round Gorlitz and Bautzen whence they could either meet 
the enemy advancing from Breslau or fall on his flank over the 
mountains if they attempted to force their way into Saxony 
by the valley of the 'Elbe. This latter manoeuvre depended, 
however, on his maintenance of Dresden, and to this end he sent 
the I. Corps up the Elbe to Pirna and Konigstein to cover the 
fortifications of Dresden itself. His instructions on this point 
deserve the closest study, for he foresaw the inevitable attraction 
which a complete entrenched camp would exercise even upon him- 
self, and, therefore, limited his engineers to the construction of a 
strong bridge head on the right bank and a continuous enceinte, 
broken only by gaps for counter attack, around the town itself. 

Then he turned his attention to the plan for the coming 
campaign. Seeing clearly that his want of an efficient cavalry 
precluded all ideas of a resolute offensive in his old style, he 
determined to limit himself to a defence of the line of the Elbe, 
making only dashes of a few days' duration at any target the 
enemy might present. 

Reinforcements had been coming up without ceasing and 
at the beginning of August he calculated that he would have 
300,000 men available about Bautzen and 100,000 along the 
Elbe from Hamburg via Magdeburg to Torgau. With the 
latter he determined to strike the first blow, by a concentric 
advance on Berlin (which he calculated he would reach on 
the 4th or 5th day), the movement being continued thence 
to extricate the French garrisons in Kiistrin, Stettin and 
Danzig. The moral effect, he promised himself, would be 
prodigious, and there was neither room nor food for these 
100,000 elsewhere. 

Towards the close of the armistice he learned the general 
situation of the allies. The crown prince of Sweden (Bernadotte), 
with his Swedes and various Prussian levies, 135,000 in all, lay 
in and around Berlin and Stettin; and knowing his former 
marshal well, Napoleon considered Oudinot a match for him. 
Bliicher with about 95,000 Russians and Prussians was about 
Breslau, and Schwarzenberg, with nearly 180,000 Austrians and 
Russians, lay in Bohemia. In his position at Bautzen he felt 
himself equal to all his enemy's combinations. 

48. Dresden. — The advance towards Berlin began punctually 
with the expiration of the armistice, but with the main army he 
himself waited to see more clearly his adversaries' plans. At 
length becoming impatient he advanced a portion of his army 
towards Bliicher, who fell back to draw him into a trap. Then 
the news reached him that Schwarzenberg was pressing down the 
valley of the Elbe, and, leaving Macdonald to observe Bliicher, 
he hurried back to Bautzen to dispose his troops to cross the 
Bohemian mountains in the general direction of Konigstein, a 
blow which must have had decisive results. But the news from 
Dresden was so alarming that at the last moment he changed his 
mind, and sending Vandamme alone over the mountains, he 
hurried with his whole army to the threatened point. This 
march remains one of the most extraordinary in history, for the 
bulk of his forces moved, mainly in mass and across country, 
90 m. in 72 hours, entering Dresden on the morning of the 27th, 
only a few hours before the attack of the allies commenced. For 
the events which followed see Dresden {battle). 

Dresden was the last great victory of the First Empire. By 
noon on the 27th August the Austrians and Russians were 
completely beaten and in full retreat, the French pressing hard 
behind them, but meanwhile Napoleon himself again succumbed 

	Span da u 
	Potsa&mJft? Heihersdorf ^N, 
	eburg 
	treueobrteuen 
	f Egelo 
	Roslau/ 
	QVitteoberg 
	Luckenwalde 
	ojiiterbogk 
	Dennpwltt 
	Da time a 
	TGubeD 
	ZSrt>iy« 
	EUlebcn/ 
	Qoerfurt* 
	Halle N 
	Bltroifcfd * 
	pDubben 
	ch S Torg«u^ 
	BelgernT^ 
	ick«u ] 
	Kaia. 
	Flosterwall 
	CottbusT 
	JfPeit* 
	PorstX 
	jjiLle-benwercla, 
	Netwa 
	MaihnbuW 
	er«burg^ 
	LUtzen/ 
	o 
	flfcls < 
	Schildesu YMuhlberg/E^^rd* 
	„Wur*en S ~ JOrtr*nd 
	-eipzig > 
	i\L lebert w<J| k wi t n 
	ft Born* 
	Atenbhrg 
	^Miltwrid* I 
	\ Freiberg 
	oyerswierd* 
	VVejssig 
	Komgsyartb* 
	Pre 1 tltz 
	B*u«eH}6k^ ©Wurachen 
	Blsct!0f9werd*\ Hodhfcirch 
	StdWn (Lobau 
	N eufrtadt^-*--^A^r'*\ 
	> 
	• Konlg shruck 
	TRatfeburg 
	r KIP 
	^rVkirtbcrj 
	Battle of -« 
	LEIPZIG 
	1. 1 Aib 1813 
	EnflnhMik* g 
	_J 
	T? 
	brlitz 
	Retcherftath <jL*ubao \ 
	Goldberg/ 
	'PUuen < 
	>hemnit 
	YZuncka 
	Schwarfenberg 
	m bu r& *j Pn«d ^9 n <j^J^f nedebcr g 
	rLiegmtr) 
	VMabJltscr) 
	(jauer 
	^Schwj/doitiS] 
	M?S$hHSj^ Wi 
	XI 
	luoau 
	rMonthengj-ata 
	Campaign of 1813 
	Scale. 1 : j,oocmxx> 
	to *o y O 

to one of his unaccountable attacks of apparent intellectual 
paralysis. He seemed unaware of the vital importance of the 
moment, crouched shivering over a bivouac fire, and finally rode 
back to Dresden, leaving no specific orders for the further pursuit. 

49. French Defeats. — The allies, however, continued to retreat, 
but unfortunately Vandamme, with his single corps and un- 
supported, issued out of the mountains on their flank, threw 
himself across their line of retreat near Kulm, and was completely 
overwhelmed by sheer weight of numbers (29th). In spite of 
this misfortune, Napoleon co\ild claim a brilliant success for 
himself, but almost at the same moment news reached him that 
Oudinot at Grossbeeren near Berlin, and Macdonald on the 
Katzbach opposed to Bliicher, had both been severely defeated. 

50. Napoleon's Movements. — During the next two days the 
emperor examined his situation and dictated a series of notes 
which have been a puzzle to every strategical thinker ever since. 
In these he seems suddenly to have cut adrift from every principle 
the truth of which he had himself so brilliantly demonstrated, 
and we find him discussing plans based on hypothesis, not 
knowledge, and on the importance of geographical points without 
reference to the enemy's field army. From these reveries he 
was at length awakened by news which indicated that the con- 
sequences of Macdonald's defeat had been far more serious to 
the moral of that command than he had imagined. He immedi- 
ately rode over to establish order, and his manner and violence 
were so improper that Caulaincourt had the greatest difficulty 
in concealing the scandal. Bliicher, however, hearing of his 
arrival, at once retreated and the emperor followed, thus 
uncovering the passes over the Bohemian mountains, a fact 
of which Schwarzenberg was quick to take advantage. Learning 
of his approach, Napoleon again withdrew to Bautzen. Then 
hearing that the Austrians had counter-marched and were again 
moving towards Dresden, he hastened back there, concentrated 
as many men as could conveniently be handled, and advanced 
beyond Pirna and Konigstein to meet him. But the Austrians 
had no intention of attacking him, for time was now working 
on their side and, leaving his men to starve in the exhausted 
district, the emperor again returned to Dresden, where for the 
rest of the month he remained in an extraordinary state of 
vacillation. On the 4th of October he again drew up a review 
of the situation, in which he apparently contemplated giving 
up his communications with France and wintering in and around 
Dresden, though at the same time he is aware of the distress 
amongst his men for want of food. 

51. Campaign of Leipzig. — In the meanwhile Bliicher, 
Schwarzenberg and Bernadotte were working round his flanks. 
Ney, who had joined Oudinot after Grossbeeren, had been 
defeated at Dennewitz (6th Sept.), the victory, won by Prussian 
troops solely, giving the greatest encouragement to the enemy. 
Suddenly Napoleon's plans are again reviewed and completely 
changed. Calling up St Cyr, whom he had already warned to 
remain at Dresden with his command, he decides to fall back 
towards Erfurt; and go into winter quarters between that place 
and Magdeburg, pointing out that Dresden was of no use to him 
as a base and that if he does have a battle, he had much better 
have St Cyr and his men with him than at Dresden. He then 
on the 7th of October drew up a final plan, in which one again 
recognizes the old commander, and this he immediately proceeded 
to put into execution, for he was now quite aware of the danger 
threatening his line of retreat from both Bliicher and Schwarzen- 
berg and the North Army; yet only a few hours afterwards 
the portion of the order relating to St Cyr and Lobau was 
cancelled and the two were finally left behind at Dresden. From 
the 10th to the 13th Napoleon lay at Diiben, again a prey to 
the most extraordinary irresolution, but on that day he thought 
he saw his opportunity. Bliicher was reported near Wittenberg, 
and Schwarzenberg was moving slowly round to the south of 
Leipzig. The North Army under Bernadotte, unknown to 
Napoleon, lay on Bliicher's left around Halle. The emperor 
decided to throw the bulk of his force on Bliicher, and, having 
routed him, turn south on Schwarzenberg and sever his com- 
munications with Bohemia. His concentration was effected 
with his usual sureness and celerity, but whilst the French moved 
on Wittenberg, Bliicher was marching to his right, indifferent 
to his communications as all Prussia lay behind him. 

This move on the 14th brought him into touch with Bernadotte, 
and now a single march forward of all three armies would have 
absolutely isolated Napoleon from France; but Bernadotte 's 
nerve failed him, for on hearing of Napoleon's threat against 
Wittenberg he decided to retreat northward, and not all the 
persuasions of Bliicher and Gneisenau could move him. Thus 
if the French movement momentarily ended in a blow in the 
air, it was indirectly the cause of their ultimate salvation. 

52. The " Battle of the Nations" — On the 15th Napoleon con- 
centrated his forces to the east of Leipzig, with only a weak 
detachment to the west, and in the evening the allies were prepared 
to attack him. Schwarzenberg, with 180,000 men available at 
once and 60,000 on the following day; Bliicher had about 
60,000, but Bernadotte now could not arrive before the 18th. 

Napoleon prepared to throw the bulk of his force upon Schwar- 
zenberg and massed his troops south-east of the town, whilst 
Schwarzenberg marched concentrically against him down 
the valley of the Elster and Pleisse, the mass of his troops 
on the right bank of the latter and a strong column under 
Giulay on the left working round to join Bliicher on the 
north. The fighting which followed was most obstinate, but the 
Austrians failed to make any impression on the French positions, 
and indeed Giulay felt himself compelled to withdraw to his 
former position. On the other hand, Bliicher carried the 
village of Mockern and came within a mile of the gates of the 
town. During the 17th there was only indecisive skirmishing, 
Schwarzenberg waiting for his reinforcements coming up by the 
Dresden road, Bliicher for Bernadotte to come in on his left, 
and by some extraordinary oversight Giulay was brought closer 
in to the Austrian centre, thus opening for the French their 
line of retreat towards Erfurt, and no imformation of this move- 
ment appears to have been conveyed to Bliicher. The emperor 
when he became aware of the movement, sent the IVth Corps 
to Lindenau to keep the road open. 

On the 18th the fighting was resumed and by about noon 
Bernadotte came up and closed the gap to the N.E. of the town 
between Bliicher and the Austrians. At 2 p.m. the Saxons, 
who had remained faithful to Napoleon longer than his other 
German allies, went over to the enemy. All hope of saving the 
battle had now to be given up, but the French covered their 
retreat obstinately and by daybreak next morning one-half 
of the army was already filing out along the road to Erfurt 
which had so fortunately been left for them. 

53. Retreat of the French and Battle of Hanau. — It took Bliicher 
time to extricate his troops from the confusion into which the 
battle had thrown them, and the garrison of Leipzig and the 
troops left on the right bank of the Elster still resisted obstinately 
— hence no direct pursuit could be initiated and the French, 
still upwards of 100,000 strong, marching rapidly, soon gained 
distance enough to be reformed. Bliicher followed by parallel 
and inferior roads on their northern flank, but Schwarzenberg 
knowing that the Bavarians also had forsaken the emperor 
and were marching under Wrede, 50,000 strong, to intercept 
his retreat, followed in a most leisurely fashion. Bliicher did 
not succeed in overtaking the French, but the latter, near 
Hanau, found their way barred by Wrede with 50,000 men and 
over 100 guns in a strong position. 

To this fresh emergency Napoleon and his army responded in 
most brilliant fashion. As at Krasnoi in 181 2, they went straight 
for their enemy and after one of the most brilliant series of 
artillery movements in history, directed by General Drouot, 
they marched right over their enemy, practically destroying his 
whole force. Henceforward their march was unmolested, and 
they reached Mainz on the 5th of November. 

54. The Defensive Campaign. — When the last of the French 
troops had crossed to the western bank of the Rhine, divided 
counsels made their appearance at the headquarters of the allies. 
Every one was weary of the war, and many felt that it would be 
unwise to push Napoleon and the French nation to extremes. 

Hence a prolonged halt arose, utilized by the troops in renewing 
their equipment and so forth, but ultimately the Young German 
party, led by Blucher and the principal fighting men of the 
army, triumphed, and on the ist of January 1814 the Silesian 
army (50,000) began its passage of the Rhine at Kaub. They 
were to be supported by Schwarzenberg with 200,000 men, who 
was to advance by Basel and Neu Breisach to the south, and 
Bernadotte with the Northern army, about 120,000, was to move 
in support on the right flank through the Netherlands and 
Laon; this force was not yet ready and did not, in fact, reach the 
latter place till March. 

To meet these forces the emperor could not collect 200,000 men 
in all, of whom upwards of 100,000 were held by Wellington on 
the Spanish frontier, and 20,000 more were required to watch 
the debouches from the Alps. Hence less than 80,000 remained 
available for the east and north-eastern frontier. If, however, 
he was weak in numbers, he was now again operating in a 
friendly country, able to find 
food almost everywhere and 
practically indifferent as to his 
communications. 

On the 25th of January, Blucher entered Nancy, and, 
moving rapidly up the valley of the Moselle, was in com- 
munication with the Austrian advanced guard near La 
Rothiere on the afternoon of the 28th. Here his head- 
quarters were surprised and he himself nearly captured by 
a sudden rush of French troops, and he learnt at the 
same time that the emperor in person was at hand. He 
accordingly fell back a few miles next morning to a strong 
position covering the exits from the Bar-sur-Aube defile. 
There he was joined by the Austrian advance guard, and 
together they decided to ac- cept battle — indeed they had 
no alternative, as the roads in rear were so choked with 

traffic that retreat was out of the question. About noon 
the 2nd of February Napoleon attacked them, but the weather 
was terrible, and the ground so heavy that his favourite 
artillery, the mainstay of his whole system of warfare, was 
useless and in the drifts of snow which at intervals swept 
across the field, the columns lost their direction and many 
were severely handled by the Cossacks. At nightfall the 
fighting ceased and the emperor retired to Lesmont, and thence 
to Troyes, Marmont being left to observe the enemy. 

55. MontmiraiL — Owing to the state of the roads, more 
perhaps to the extraordinary lethargy which always characterized 
Schwarzenberg's headquarters, no pursuit was attempted. 
But on the 4th of February Blucher, chafing at this inaction, 
obtained the permission of his own sovereign to transfer his 
line of operations to the valley of the Marne; Pahlen's corps 
of Cossacks were assigned to him to cover his left and maintain 
communication with the Austrians. 

Believing himself secure behind this screen, he advanced from 
Vitry along the roads leading down the valley of the Marne, 
with his columns widely separated for convenience of subsistence 
and shelter — the latter being almost essential in the terrible 
weather prevailing. Blucher himself on the night of the 7th was at 
Sezanne, on the exposed flank so as to be nearer to his sources 
of intelligence, and the rest of his army were distributed in 
four small corps at or near fipernay, Montmirail and fitoges; 
reinforcements also were on their way to join him and were then 
about Vitry. 

In the night his headquarters were again surprised, and he 
learnt that Napoleon himself with his main body was in full 
march to fall on his scattered detachments. At the same time 
he heard that Pahlen's Cossacks had been withdrawn forty-eight 
hours previously, thus completely exposing his flank. He himself 
retreated towards fitoges endeavouring to rally his scattered 
detachments, but Napoleon was too quick for him and in three 
successive days he defeated Sacken at Montmirail,York at Champ 
Aubert and Blucher and his main body at fitoges, pursuing 
the latter towards Vertus. These disasters compelled the retreat 
of the whole Silesian army, and Napoleon, leaving Mortier and 
Marmont to deal with them, hurried back to Troyes with his 
main body to strike the flank of Schwarzenberg's army, which had 
meanwhile begun its leisurely advance, and again at Mormant on 
the 17th of February, Montereau the 18th and Mery the 21st, he 
inflicted such heavy punishment upon his adversaries that they 
fell back precipitately to Bar-sur-Aube. 


	CAMPAIGN of 1814 -\jK 
	Scale. 1:2.000,000 
	English Miles 
	Emery Waifccrsc 

56. Laon. — In the meantime Blucher had rallied his scattered 
forces and was driving Marmont and Mortier before him. 
Napoleon, as soon as he had disembarrassed himself of Schwarzen- 
berg, counter-marched his main body and moving again by 
Sezanne, fell upon Bliicher's left and drove him back upon 
Soissons. This place had been held by a French garrison, 
but had capitulated only twenty-four hours beforehand, a fact 
of which Napoleon was naturally unaware. The Silesian army 
was thus able to escape, and marching northwards combined 
with Bernadotte at Laon — this reinforcement bringing the 
forces at Bliicher's disposal up to over 100,000 men. 

On the 7th of March Napoleon fell upon the advance guard of 
this force at Craonne and drove it back upon Laon, where a 
battle took place on the 9th. Napoleon was here defeated, and 
with only 30,000 men at his back he was compelled to renounce 
all ideas of a further offensive, and he retired to rest his troops 
to Reims. Here he remained unmolested for a few days, for 
Blucher was struck down by sickness, and in his absence nothing 
was done. On the 14th of March, however, Schwarzenberg, 
becoming aware of Napoleon's withdrawal to Reims, again began 
his advance and had reached Arcis-sur-Aube when the news of 
Napoleon's approach again induced him to retreat to Bricnne. 

57. The Allies March on Paris. — Thus after six weeks' fighting 
the allies were hardly more advanced than at the beginning. 
Now, however, they began to realize the weakness of their 
opponent, and perhaps actuated by the fear that Wellington 
from Toulouse might, after all, reach Paris first, they determined 
to march to Paris (then an open city), and let Napoleon do his 
worst to their communications. Actually this was exactly what 
he was preparing to do. He had determined to move eastward 
to St Dizier, rally what garrisons he could find, and raise the whole 
country against the invaders, and had actually started on the 
execution of this plan when his instructions fell into the enemy's 
hands and his projects were exposed. Regardless of the threat, 
the allies marched straight for the capital. Marmont and 
Mortier with what troops they could rally took up a position on 
Montmartre heights to oppose them, but seeing further resistance 
to be hopeless they gave way on the 31st of March, just as 
Napoleon, with the wreck of the Guards and a mere handful of 
other detachments, was hurrying across the rear of the Austrians 
towards Fontainebleau to join them. 

This was the end of the First Empire. The story of the Water- 
loo Campaign is told under its own heading. 

The Military Character of Napoleon. 

No military career has been examined more often and more 
freely than that of Napoleon. Yet even so the want of complete 
documentary evidence upon which to base conclusions has 
vitiated all but the most recent of the countless monographs 
and histories that have appeared on the subject. Fortunately 
the industry and ability of the military history section of the 
French General Staff have rendered available, by the publica- 
tion of the original orders issued during the course of his 
campaigns, a mass of information which, taken in conjunction 
with his own voluminous correspondence, renders it possible 
to trace the growth of his military genius with a reasonable 
approach to accuracy. Formerly we could only watch the 
evolution of his powers of organization and the purely psychic 
gifts of resolution and command. The actual working of his 
mind towards that strategic and tactical ascendancy that 
rendered his presence on the battlefield, according to the testi- 
mony of his opponents, equal to a reinforcement of 40,000 men, 
was entirely undiscernible. 

The history of his youth reveals no special predilection for 
the military service — the bent of his mind was political far more 
than military, but unlike the politicians of his epoch he con- 
sistently applied scientific and mathematical methods to his 
theories, and desired above all things a knowledge of facts in 
their true relation to one another. His early military education 
was the best and most practical then attainable, primarily 
because he had the good fortune to come under the influence 
of men of exceptional ability — Baron du Keile, Bois Roger and 
others. From them he derived a sound knowledge of artillery 
and fortification, and particularly of mountain warfare, which 
latter was destined to prove of inestimable service to him in 
his first campaigns of 1794-95 and 1796. In these, as well as 
in his most dramatic success of Marengo in 1800, we can discern 
no trace of strategical innovation. He was simply a master of 
the methods of his time. Ceaseless industry, energy and con- 
spicuous personal gallantry were the principal factors of his 
brilliant victories, and even in 1805 at Ulm and Austerlitz 
it was still the excellence of the tactical instrument, the army, 
which the Revolution had bequeathed to him that essentially 
produced the results. 

Meanwhile the mathematical mind, with its craving for accurate 
data on which to found its plans (the most difficult of all to obtain 
under the conditions of warfare), had been searching for ex- 
pedients which might serve him to better purpose, and in 1805 
he had recourse to the cavalry screen in the hope of such results. 
This proved a palliation of his difficulty, but not a solution. 
Cavalry can only observe, it cannot hold. The facts as to the 
position of an opponent accurately observed and correctly re- 
ported at a given moment, afford no reliable guarantee of his 
position 48 hours later, when the orders based on this information 
enter upon execution. This can only be calculated on the ground 
of reasonable probability as to what it may be to the best interest 
of the adversary to attempt. But what may seem to a Napoleon 
the best course is not necessarily the one that suggests itself 
to a mediocre mind, and the greater the gulf which separates 
the two minds the greater the uncertainty which must prevail 
on the side of the abler commander. 

It was in 1806 that an improved solution was first devised 
The general advanced guard of all arms now followed immediately 
behind the cavalry screen and held the enemy in position, 
while the remainder of the army followed at a day's march in 
a " bataillon carree " ready to manoeuvre in any required direc- 
tion. The full reach of this discovery seems as yet scarcely 
to have impressed itself upon the emperor with complete con- 
viction, for in the succeeding campaign in Poland we find that 
he twice departed from this form — at Pultusk and Heilsberg — 
and each time his enemy succeeded in escaping him. At Fried- 
land, however, his success was complete, and henceforth the 
method recurs on practically every battlefield. When it fails it is 
because its inventor himself hesitates to push his own concep- 
tion to its full development (Eckmuhl 1809, Borodino i8r2). Yet 
it would seem that this invention of Napoleon's was intuitive 
rather than reasoned; he never communicated it in its entirety 
to his marshals, and seems to have been only capable of exercising 
it either when in full possession of his health or under the excite- 
ment of action. Thus we find him after the battle of Dresden — 
itself a splendid example of its efficacy — suddenly reverting 
to the terminology of the school in which he had been brought 
up, which he himself had destroyed, only to revive again in the 
next few days and handle his forces strategically with all his 
accustomed brilliancy. 

In 1814 and in i8rs in the presence of the enemy he again 
rises supremely to each occasion, only to lapse in the intervals 
even below the level of his old opponents; and that this was not 
the consequence of temporary depression naturally resulting 
from the accumulated load of his misfortunes, is sufficiently 
shown by the downright puerility of the arguments by which 
he seeks to justify his own successes in the St Helena memoirs, 
which one may search in vain for any indication that Napoleon 
was himself aware of the magnitude of his own discovery. One 
is forced to the conclusion that there existed in Napoleon's 
brain a dual capacity — one the normal and reasoning one, 
developing only the ideas and conceptions of his contemporaries, 
the other intuitive, and capable only of work under abnormal 
pressure. At such moments of crisis it almost excelled human 
comprehension; the mind seems to have gathered to itself 
and summed up the balance of all human passions arranged for 
and against him, and to have calculated with unerring exacti- 
tude the consequences of each decision. 

A partial explanation of this phenomenon may perhaps be 
found in the economy of nervous energy his strategical method 
ensured to him. Marching always ready to fight wherever his 
enemy might stand or move to meet him, his mind was relieved 
from all the hesitations which necessarily arise in men less 
confident in the security of their designs. Hence, when on the 
battlefield the changing course of events left his antagonists 
mentally exhausted, he was able to face them with will power 
neither hound nor broken. But this only explains a portion 
of the mystery that surrounds him, and which will make the 
study of his career the most fascinating to the military student 
of all times. 

Amongst all the great captains of history Cromwell alone 
can be compared to him. Both, in their powers of organization 
and the mastery of the tactical potentialities of the weapons 
of their day, were immeasurably ahead of their times, and both 
also understood to the full the strategic art of binding and 
restraining the independent will power of their opponents, 
an art of which Marlborough and Frederick, Wellington, Lee 
and Moltke do not seem ever even to have grasped the fringe. 

(F.N.M.) 

Bibliography, — Among the principal modern works on Napo- 
leon's campaigns 1805-14. are the following: Yorck von Wartenbere, 
Napoleon als Feldherr (1866, English and French translations); 
H. Camon, La Guerre napoUonienne (Paris, 1903); H. Bonnal, 
Esprit de la guerre moderne (a series of works, of which those dealing 
with 1805-1812 are separately mentioned below). For 1805 see 
Alombert and Colin (French Gen. Staff), Campagne de 180$ en 
Allemagne (Paris, 1898-1910); H. Bonnal, De Rosbach d Ulm (Paris, 
; Sir D. Haig, Cavalry Studies (London, 1907) ; G. A. Furse, Ulm, 
* \ar and Austerlitz (London, 1905). For 1 806-1 807, Pr. Kraft 
1903) ; £ 
Trafalgc 
zu Hohenlohe-Ingelnngen, Letters on Strategy (Eng. trans., vol. i.); 
Freiherr v. d. Goltz, Rossbach und Jena; the new edition of the same 
work, Von Rossbach bis Jena und Auerstddl (Berlin, 1906) and Von 
Jena bis Preussisch-Eylau (Berlin, 1908); Studies in French 
Gen. Staff Revue d'Histoire (1909); P. Foucart, Campagne de 
Prusse; H. Bonnal, La Manoeuvre d Iena (Paris, 1904); Memoirs of 
Bennigsen (trans, by E. Cazalas, French Gen. Staff, 1909); F. N. 
Maude, The Jena Campaign (London, 1909); F. L. Petre, Napoleon's 
Campaign in Poland (London, 1902). For 1809, H. Bonnal, La 
Manoeuvre de Landskut (Paris, 1905); Saski, Campagne de i8oq 
(Paris, 1S99-1902); Ritter v. Angeli, Erzherzog Karl (Vienna, 
1895-1897); Lieut. Field Marshal von Woinovich (ed.), Das 
Kriegsjahr i8oq\ Buat, De Ratisbonne & Znaim (Paris, 1910). 
For 1812, G. Fabry (French Gen. Staff), Campagne de 1812 (Paris, 
1904); La Guerre nationale de 18 12 (French translation from the 
Russian general staff work, Paris, 1904); H. Bonnal, La Manoeuvre 
de Vilna (Paris, 1905) ; Freiherr v. d. Osten-Sacken, Feldzug 1812 
(Berlin, 1899) ; H. B. George, Napoleon's Invasion of Russia (London, 
1900). For 1813, F. N. Maude, TJie Leipzig Campaign (London, 
1908); Lanrezac, La Manoeuvre de Liitzen; B. v. Quistorp, Gesch. 
der Nordarmee 1813 (1894); v. Holleben, Gesch. des Fruhjahrs- 
feldzug 1813 (Berlin, 1904) ; Friedrich, Der Herbstfeldzug 1K13 
(Berlin, 1 903-1 906). For 1814, German Gen. Staff, Kriegs gesch. 
Einzelschriften, No. 13; v. Janson, Der Feldzug 1814 in Frankreich 
(Berlin, 1903-1905). See also works mentioned under French 
Revolutionary YVars and under biographical headings, as well as 
the general histories of the time. 

Naval Operations 

The French navy came under the direct and exclusive control 
of Napoleon after the 18th Brumaire. At the close of 1799 (see 
French Revolutionary Wars) he had three purposes to serve 
by the help of his fleet: the relief of the French garrison besieged 
by the British forces in Malta; the reinforcement of the army 
he had left in Egypt; and the distraction of Great Britain by 
the threat of invasion of England across the Channel, or of 
Ireland. The deficiencies both in number and in quality of his 
naval resources doomed him to fail in all three. Though he had 
control of what remained of the navies of Holland and Spain, 
as well as of the French, he was outnumbered at every point, 
while the efficiency of the British fleet gave it a mobility which 
doubled its material superiority. All Napoleon's efforts to sup- 
port his troops in Malta and Egypt were necessarily made under 
the hampering obligation to evade the British forces barring the 
road. The inevitable result was that only an occasional blockade- 
runner could succeed in escaping detection and attack. The relief 
thus brought to Malta and Egypt was not sufficient. In February 
1800, the " Genereux " (74), one of the few ships which escaped 
from the Nile, sailed from Toulon with three corvettes, under 
Rear-admiral Perree, to relieve Malta. On the 18th she was 
sighted by the blockading squadron, surrounded and captured. 
Three other survivors of the Nile were at anchor in Malta — the 
" Guillaume Tell " (80), and two frigates, the " Diane " and the 
" Justice." On the 29th of July the " Guillaume Tell " en- 
deavoured to slip out in the night. She was sighted, pursued 
and overpowered, after a singularly gallant resistance. The 
frigates made an attempt to get off on the 24th of August, but 
only the " Justice," a solitary survivor of the squadron which 
fought at the Nile, reached Toulon. Malta, starved out by the 
British fleet,- surrendered on the 5th of September 1800. Very 
similar was the fate of the efforts to reach and reinforce the 
army of Egypt. The British squadrons either stopped the re- 
lieving forces at their point of departure, or baffled, when they 
did not take them, at their landfall. A squadron of seven sail of 
the line, under Admiral Ganteaume, succeeded in slipping out of 
Brest, when a gale had driven the British blockading force off 
the coast. Ganteaume met with some measure of success in 
capturing isolated British men-of-war, one of them being a 74, 
the " Swiftsure." But he failed to give effectual help to the 
Egyptian army. He sailed ovl the 23rd of January 1801, entered 
the Mediterranean and, his squadron being in a bad condition, 
steered for Toulon, which he reached on the 18th of February. 
On the 19th of March he sailed again for Egypt, but was again 
driven back by the same causes on the 5th of April. On the 25th 
he was ordered out once more. Three of his ships had to be sent 
back as unfit to keep the sea. With the other four he reached 
the coast of Egypt, on the 7th of May, only to sight a powerful 
British force, and to be compelled to escape to Toulon, which he 
did not reach till the 22nd of July. The French in Egypt were 
in fact beaten before he reached the coast. At the beginning of 
1801, a British naval force, commanded by Lord Keith, had 
sailed from Gibraltar, escorting an army of 18,000 men under 
General Abercromby. It reached Marmorice Bay, in Asia Minor, 
on the 31st of January, to arrange a co-operation with the Turks, 
and after some delay the army was transported and landed in 
Egypt, on the 7th and 8th of March. Before the end of September 
the French army was reduced to capitulate. In the interval 
another effort to carry help to it was made from Toulon. On 
the 13th of June 1801 Rear-admiral Linois left Toulon with 
three sail of the line, to join a Spanish squadron at Cadiz and go 
on to Egypt. In the straits he was sighted by the British 
squadron under Sir J. Saumarez, and driven to seek the protection 
of the Spanish batteries in Algeciras. On the 6th of July he 
beat off a British attack, capturing the " Hannibal," 74. On 
the 9th a Spanish squadron came to his assistance, and the com- 
bined force steered for Cadiz. During the night of the 12th/ 13th 
of July they were attacked by Sir J. Saumarez. Two Spanish 
three-deckers blew up, and a 74-gun ship was taken. The others 
were blockaded in Cadiz. The invasion scheme was vigorously 
pushed after the "3rd of March 1801. Flat-bottomed boats were 
gradually collected at Boulogne. Two attempts to destroy them 
at anchor, though directed by Nelson himself, were repulsed 
on the 4th and 16th of August. But the invasion was so far 
little more than a threat made for diplomatic purposes. On 
the 1 st of October 1801 an armistice was signed in London, 
and the Peace of Amiens followed, on the 27th of March 1802. 
(For the operations in the Baltic in 1801, see Copenhagen, 
Battle of.) 

The Peace of Amiens proved to be only an uneasy truce, 
and it was succeeded by open war, on the 18th of May 1803. 
From that date till about the middle of August 1805, a space of 
some two years and two months, the war took the form of a most 
determined attempt on the part of Napoleon to carry out an 
invasion of Great Britain, met by the counter measures of the 
British government. The scheme of invasion was based on the 
Boulogne flotilla, a device inherited from the old French ro^al 
government, through the Republic. Its object was to throw 
a great army ashore on the coast between Dover and Hastings. 
The preparations were made on an unprecedented scale. The 
Republic had collected some two hundred and forty vessels. 
Under the direction of Napoleon ten times as many were equipped. 
They were divided into: pratnes, ship-rigged, of 35 metres long 
and 8 wide, carrying 12 guns; chaloupes cannonieres, of 24 metres 
long and 5 wide, carrying 5 guns and brig-rigged; bateaux 
cannoniers, of 19 metres long by 1-56 wide, carrying 2 guns and 
mere boats. All were built to be rowed, were flat-bottomed, and 
of shallow draft so as to be able to navigate close to the shore, and 
to take the ground without hurt. They were built in France 
and the Low Countries, in the coast towns and the rivers — even 
in Paris — and were collected gradually, shore batteries both fixed 
and mobile being largely employed to cover the passage. A 
vast sum of money and the labour of thousands of men were 
employed to clear harbours for them, at and near Boulogne. 
The shallow water on the coast made it impossible for the British 
line-of-battle ships, or even large frigates, to press the attack'on 
them home. Smaller vessels they were able to beat off and so, 
in spite of the activity of the British cruisers and of many sharp 
encounters, the concentration was effected at Boulogne, where an 
army of 130,000 was encamped and was incessantly practised 
in embarking and disembarking. Before the invasion was 
taken in hand as a serious policy, there had been at least a pro- 
fession of a belief that the flotilla could push across the Channel 
during a calm. Experience soon showed that when the needful 
allowance was made for the time required to bring them out 
of harbour (two tides) and for the influence which the Channel 
currents must have upon their speed, it would be extremely rash 
to rely on a calm of sufficient length. Napoleon therefore came 
early to the conclusion that he must bring about a concentration 
of his seagoing fleet in the Channel, which would give him a 
temporary command of its waters. 

He had a squadron at Brest, ships at L'Orient and Rochefort, 
some of his vessels had taken refuge at Ferrol on their way back 
from San Domingo when war broke out, one was at Cadiz, and 
he had a squadron at Toulon. All these forces were watched by 
British blockading squadrons. The problem was to bring them 
together before the British fleet could be concentrated to meet 
them. Napoleon's solution grew, as time went on and circum- 
stances changed, in scope and complexity. In July 1804 he 
ordered his admiral commanding at Toulon, Latouche Treville, 
to seize an opportunity when Nelson, who was in command of the 
blockade, was driven off by a northerly gale, to put to sea, with 
10 sail of the line, pick up the French ship in Cadiz, join Ville- 
neuve who was in the Aix roads, and then effect a junction with 
Ganteaume and the 21 sail of the line at Brest. He hoped that 
if the British ships in the North Sea concentrated with the 
squadron in the Channel, he would be able to make use of Dutch 
vessels from the Texel. The death of Latouche Treville, 20th of 
August 1804, supplied an excuse for delay. He was succeeded by 
Villeneuve. Napoleon now modified the simple plan prepared 
for Latouche Treville, and began laying elaborate plans by which 
French vessels were to slip out and sail for distant seas, to draw 
the British fleet after them, and then return to concentrate in 
the Channel. A further modification was introduced by the end 
of 1804. Spain, which was bound by treaty to join Napoleon, 
was allowed to preserve a show of neutrality by paying a monthly 
subvention. The British government, treating this as a hostile 
action — as it was — seized the Spanish treasure ships on their 
way from America, near Cape Santa Maria, on the 5th of October 
1804, and Spain declared war on the 12th of December. New 
plans were now made including the co-operation of the Spanish 
fleet. Amid all the variation in their details, and the apparent 
confusion introduced by Napoleon's habit of suggesting alter- 
natives and discussing probabilities, and in spite of the prepara- 
tions ostensibly made for an expedition to Ireland, which was 
to have sailed from Brest and to have carried 30,000 troops 
commanded by Augereau, the real purpose of Napoleon was 
neither altered nor concealed. He worked to produce doubt 
and confusion in the mind of the British government by threats 
and attacks on its distant possessions, which should lead it to 
scatter its forces. One of these ventures was actually carried 
out, without, however, securing the co-operation, or effecting 
the purpose he had in view. On the nth of January 1805 
Admiral Missiessy left Rochefort with 5 sail of the line, un- 
detected by the British forces on the coast. Missiessy carried out 
a successful voyage of commerce-destroying, and returned safely 
to Rochefort on the 20th of May, from the West Indies. But 
the force sent in pursuit of him was small, and the British 
government was not deceived into weakening its hold on the 
Channel. It was in fact well supplied with information by 
means of the spy service directed by an exiled French royalist, 
the count d'Antraigues, who was established at Dresden as a 
Russian diplomatic agent. Through his correspondents in Paris, 
some of whom had access to Napoleon's papers, the x British 
government was able to learn the emperor's real intentions. 
The blockade of Brest was so strictly maintained that Ganteaume 
was allowed no opportunity to get to sea. Villeneuve, who 
was to have co-operated with Missiessy, did indeed leave Toulon, 
at a moment when Nelson, whose policy it was to encourage 
him to come out by not staying too near the port, was absent, 
on the 1 7th of January 1805. The British admiral, when informed 
that the French were at sea, justified Napoleon's estimate of his 
probable course in such a contingency, by making a useless 
cruise to Egypt. But Villeneuve's ill-appointed ships, manned 
by raw crews, suffered loss of spars in a gale, and he returned to 
Toulon on the 21st. His last start came when he sailed, unseen 
by Nelson, on the 30th of March. Aided by lucky changes of 
wind, he reached Cadiz, was joined by 1 French and 6 Spanish 
ships under Admiral Gravina, which, added to the 11 he had 
with him, gave him a force of 18 sail. He left Cadiz on the night 
of the 9th/ioth of April, and reached Fort de France in Martin- 
ique on the 14th of May. Here he was to have remained till 
joined by Ganteaume from Brest. On the 1st of June he was 
joined by a frigate and two line-of-battle ships sent with orders 
from Rochefort, and was told to remain in the West Indies till 
the 5th of July, and if not joined by Ganteaume to steer for 
Ferrol, pick up the French and Spanish ships in the port, and 
come on to the Channel. Villeneuve learnt on the 8th of June 
that Nelson had reached Barbadoes in pursuit of him on the 4th. 
The British admiral, delayed by contrary winds, had not been 
able to start from the entry to the Straits of Gibraltar till the 
nth of May. An action in the West Indies would have ruined 
the emperor's plan of concentration, and Villeneuve decided to 
sail at once for Ferrol. Nelson, misled by false information, 
ranged the West Indies as far south as the Gulf of Paria, in search 
of his opponent whom he supposed to be engaged in attacks on 
British possessions. By the 13th of June he had learnt the truth, 
and sailed for Gibraltar under the erroneous impression that the 
French admiral would return to Toulon. He sent a brig home 
with despatches; on the 19th of June, in lat. 33 12' N. and 
long. 5 8° W., the French were seen by this vessel heading for 
the Bay of Biscay. Captain Bettesworth who commanded the 
brig hurried home, and the information he brought was at once 
acted on by Lord Barham, the First Lord of the Admiralty, 
who took measures to station a force to intercept Villeneuve 
outside Ferrol. On the 22nd of July, 35 leagues N.W. of Finis- 
terre, Villeneuve was met by the British admiral sent to intercept 
him, Sir Robert Calder. A confused action in a fog ended in the 
capture of 2 Spanish line-of-battle ships. But Sir R. Calder, 
who had only 15 ships to his opponent's 20 and was nervous 
lest he should be overpowered, did not act with energy. He 
retreated to join the blockading fleet off Brest. Villeneuve was 
now able to join the vessels at Ferrol. Nelson, who reached 
Gibraltar on the yery day the action off Ferrol was fought, was 
too far away to interfere with him. But Villeneuve, who was 
deeply impressed by the inefficiency of the ships of his fleet and 
especially of the Spaniards, and who was convinced that an 
overwhelming British force would be united against him in the 
Channel, lost heart, and on the 15th of August sailed south to 
Cadiz. By this movement he ruined the emperor's elaborate 
scheme. Napoleon at once broke up the camp at Boulogne and 
marched to Germany! The further movements of Villeneuve's 
fleet are told under Trafalgar, Battle of. 

With the collapse of the invasion scheme, the naval war 
between Napoleon and Great Britain entered on a new phase. 
It lost at once the unity given to it by the efforts of the emperor 
to effect, and of the British government to baffle the passage of 
the Channel by an army. In place of the movements of great 
fleets to a single end, we have a nine years' story (1805-18 14) 
of cruising for the protection of commerce, of convoy, of colonial 
expeditions to capture French, Dutch or Spanish possessions 
and of combined naval and military operations in which the 
British navy was engaged in carrying troops to various countries, 
and in supporting them on shore. Napoleon continued to build 
line-of-battle ships in numbers from Venice to Hamburg, but 
only in order to force the British government to maintain 
costly and wearing blockades. He never allowed his fleets to go 
to sea to seek battle. The operations of the British fleet were 
therefore divided between the work of patrolling the ocean roads 
and ancillary services to diplomacy, or to the armies serving in 
Italy, Denmark and, after 1808, in Spain. The remaining colonial 
possessions of France, and of Holland, then wholly dependent 
on her, were conquered by degrees, and the ports in which 
privateers were fitted out to cruise against British commerce 
in distant seas were gradually rendered harmless. Though 
privateering was carried on by the French with daring and a 
considerable measure of success, it did not put an appreciable 
check on the growth of British merchant shipping. The function 
of the British navy in the long conflict with Napoleon was of the 
first importance, and its services' were rendered in every sea, 
but their very number, extent and complexity render it impossible 
here to record them in detail. 

Bibliography. — Captain Mahan, Influence of Sea Power upon 
the French Revolution and the Empire (London, 1892); Chevalier, 
Histoire de la marine franchise sous le consulat et V empire (Paris, 
1886)'. All the operations connected with the successive invasion 
schemes are recorded, with exhaustive quotations of documentary 
evidence, in Projets et tentatives de debarquement aux lies Britan- 
niques, by Captain Desbricre (Paris, 1901). Captain Desbriere's 
exhaustive work was done for the historical section of the French 
general staff, and is a fine example of the scholarly and conscientious 
modern French historical school. (D. H.) 


NAPOLEONITE, also called Corsite because the stone is 
found in the island of Corsica, a variety of diorite which is 
characterized by orbicular structure. The grey matrix of the 
stone has the normal appearance of a diorite, but contains many 
rounded lumps 1 or 2 in. in diameter, which show concentric 
zones of light and dark colours. In these spheroids also a 
distinct and well-marked radial arrangement of the crystals is 
apparent. The centre of the spheroid is usually white or pale 
grey and consists mainly of felspar; the same mineral makes the 
pale zones while the dark ones are rich in hornblende and 
pyroxene. The felspar is a basic variety of plagioclase (anorthite 
or bytownite). Though mostly rounded, the spheroids may 
be elliptical or subangular; sometimes they are in contact with 
one another but usually they are separated by small areas of 
massive diorite. When cut and polished the rock makes a beauti- 
ful and striking ornamental stone. It has been used for making 
paper-weights and other small ornamental articles. 

Spheroidal structure is found in other diorites and in quite a 
number of granites in various^ places, such as Sweden, Russia, 
America, Sardinia, Ireland. It is by no means common, however, 
and usually occurs in only a small part of a granitic or dioritic mass, 
being sometimes restricted to an area of a few square yards. In 
most cases it is found near the centre of the outcrop, though ex- 
ceptionally it has beep found quite close to the margin. It arises 
evidently from intermittent and repeated crystallization of the rock- 
forming minerals in successive stages. Such a process would be 
favoured by complete rest, which would allow of supersatu ration of 
the magma byone of the components. Rapid crystallization would 
follow, producing deposits on any suitable nuclei, and the crystals 
then formed might have a radial disposition on the surfaces on 
which they grew. The magma might then be greatly impoverished 
in this particular substance, and another deposit of a different kind 
would follow, producing^ zone of different colour. The nucleus for 
the spheroidal growth is sometimes an early porphyritic crystal, 
sometimes an enclosure of gneiss, &c, and often does not differ 
essentially in composition from the surrounding rock. When spher- 
oids are in contact their inner zones may be distinct while the outer 
ones are common to both individuals having the outlines of a figure 
of eight. This proves that growth was centrifugal, not centripetal. 

Many varieties of spheroids are described presenting great differ- 
ences in composition and in structure. Some are merely rounded 
balls consisting of the earliest minerals of the rock, such as apatite, 
zircon, biotite and hornblende, and possessing no regular arrange- 
ment. Others have as centres a foreign fragment such as gneiss 
or hornfels, with one or more zones, pale or dark, around this. 
Radial arrangement of the crystals, though often very perfect, is 
by no means universal. The spheroids are sometimes flattened or 
ejjg-shaped, apparently by fluxion movements of the magma at a 
time when they were semi-solid or plastic. As a general rule the 
spheroids are more basic and richer in the ferromagnesian minerals 
than the surrounding rock, though some of the zones are often very 
rich inquartz and felspar. Graphic or perthitic intergrowths between 
the minerals of a zone are frequent. The spheroids vary in width 
up to 1 or 2 ft. m In some cases they contain abnormal constituents 
such as calcite, sillimanite or corundum, (J. S. F.) 


NAQUET, ALFRED JOSEPH (1834- ), French chemist 
and politician, was born at Carpentras (Vaucluse), on the 6th 
of October 1834. He became professor in the faculty of medicine 
in Paris in 1863, and in the same year professor of chemistry 
at Palermo, where he delivered his lectures in Italian. He lost 
his professorship in 1867 with his civic rights, when he was 
condemned to fifteen months' imprisonment for his share in a 
secret society. On a new prosecution in 1869 for his book 
Religion, propriiU, famille he took refuge in Spain. Returning 
to France under the government of Smile Ollivier he took an 
active share in the revolution of the 4th of September 1870, 
and became secretary of the commission of national defence. 
In the National Assembly he sat on the extreme Left, consistently 
opposing the opportunist policy of successive governments. 
Re-elected to the Chamber of Deputies he began the agitation 
against the marriage laws with which his name is especially 
connected. His proposal for the re-establishment of divorce was 
discussed in May 1879, and again in 1881 and 1882, and became 
law two years later. Naquet, although he disapproved in 
principle of a second chamber, secured his election to the senate 
in 1883 to pilot his measure through that body. In 1886 by his 
efforts divorce became legal after three years of definite separa- 
tion on the demand of one of the parties concerned. In 1890 he 
resigned from the senate to re-enter the Chamber of Deputies, 
this time for the 5th arrondissement of Paris, and took his seat 
with the Boulangist deputies. After Boulanger's suicide Ids 
political influence declined, and was further compromised by 
accusations (of which he was legally cleared) in connexion with 
the Panama scandals. 

The thesis written for his doctorate, Application de V analyse 
chimioue & la toxicologic (1859), was followed by many papers on 
chemistry contributed to learned journals, and his Principes de 
chimie fondes sur les theories modernes (1865) reached its 5th edition 
in 1890. Vie is better known by his political works, Socialisme 
coltectiviste et socialisme liberal (1890, Eng. trans., 1891), VHumanite 
et la patrie (1901), Lot du divorce (1903), L'Anarchie et le collectivisme 
(1904), Disarmament ou alliance anglaise (1908). 


NARA, an important water channel in Sind, India, probably 
representing a former bed of the Indus, though now traversing 
the desert far E. of the river. Its total length is 250 m.; and by 
means of cross cuts, weirs and embankments, it has been made 
to irrigate no less than 429 sq. m., with a navigable length of 
425 m. 


NARA, a town of Japan, in the province of Yamato, 25 \ m. 
from Osaka by rail. Pop. 32,000. It lies on the slope of a range 
of picturesque hills, beautifully wooded with cryptomerias, 
evergreen oaks, &c. This was the first permanent capital of 
Japan. Up to the beginning of the 8th century the imperial 
court changed its location at the accession of each sovereign, and 
the court's place of residence naturally became the official 
metropolis. But Nara remained the metropolis during seven 
consecutive reigns (709 to 784), and its seventy-five years of 
favoured existence sufficed for the building and furnishing of 
several imposing shrines and temples, for the laying out of a 
noble park, for the casting of a colossal image of Buddha, and 
for the execution of many other beautiful specimens of applied 
art. Not much is known of the Nara palace in its original form, 
but many of the articles and ornaments used by its inmates 
survive in a celebrated collection which, during nearly twelve 
hundred years, had been preserved in a store-house (Shoso-in) 
near the temple of Todai-ji. This collection cannot be visited 
by strangers more than once a year, and even then only by special 
permission. The vigorous growth of the Buddhist creed through- 
out the Nara epoch was remarkable, and found outward ex- 
pression in many striking architectural and artistic works. The 
best of these, namely, those dating from the first half of the 
8th century, show Indo-Grecian affinities, which gradually grow 
fainter as the end of the epoch approaches. The temple called 
Todai-ji was completed about 750. At present the buildings 
enclose a quadrangle 520 ft. by 620, the south side being mainly 
occupied by the huge, ungainly and no longer perpendicular hall 
containing the Dai Butsu, or colossal statue of Buddha. The 
casting of this wonderful piece of work was accomplished after 
eight failures in 749 by Takusho, an artist from Korea. On two 
occasions the head was melted during the burning of the temple 
(1180 and 1567) and from 1567 to 1697 the statue stood exposed 
to the weather. The height of the figure is 53 ft. On a hill to the 
east of the temple stands a bell-house with a huge bell, cast in 
732, 13^ ft. high, 9 ft. across the mouth and weighing 37 tons. 
The great Buddha is often spoken of as the most remarkable of 
the Nara relics; but restorations have so marred it that it can 
no longer be compared with many smaller examples of con- 
temporaneous and subsequent sculpture. More worthy of close 
attention are two effigies of Brahma and Indra preserved among 
the relics of Kobuku-ji, which, with Kasuga-no-Miya, Ni-gwatsu- 
do and Todai-ji, constitute the chief religious edifices. These 
figures, sculptured in wood, have suffered much from the ravages ' 
of time, but nothing could destroy the grandeur of their propor- 
tions or the majesty and dignity of their pose. Several other 
works of scarcely inferior excellence may be seen among the 
relics, and at the shrine of Kasuga is performed a religious dance 
called Kagura, in which the costumes and gestures of the dancers 
are douhtless the same as those of twelve centuries back. Kasuga- 
no-Miya was founded in 767, and its chapels with their rough red- 
painted log-work afford fine examples of primitive Japanese 
architecture. In the temple-park are herds of tame deer; and 
little images of deer and trinkets from deer's horn are the favourite 
charms purchased by the pilgrims. Within the enclosure stands 
a curious old trunk of seven plants entwined, including a camellia, 
cherry and wistaria. Of the great Buddhist temple Kobuku-ji, 
founded in 710, and burnt for the third time in 1717, there 
remains little save two lofty pagodas. A railway now gives 
access to the town, but every effort is made to preserve all the 
ancient features of Nara. A museum has been formed, where 
many antique objects of great interest are displayed, as well as 
works from the hands of comparatively modern artists. Nara 
in the days of its prosperity is said to have had a population of 
a quarter of a million. 


NARAINGANJ, or Narayanganj, a town of India, in the 
Dacca district of eastern Bengal and Assam, situated near the 
junction of two rivers with the Meghna, 10 m. by rail S. of Decca 
city. Pop. ( 1 901) 24,472. As the port of Dacca, having steamer 
communication with both Calcutta and Chittagong, it has 
become the chief entrepot for the jute trade of eastern Bengal. 
There are 73 jute-presses, employing 6000 hands, and the annual 
export of jute exceeds 300,000 tons. It also ranks as the model 
municipality of Bengal. 


NARBONNE, a city of France, capital of an arrondissement 
in the department of Aude, situated in a vine-growing plain 
5 m. from the Mediterranean, on the railway from Toulouse to 
Cette, 37 m. E. of Carcassonne. Pop. (1906) 23,289. The Robine 
canal, a hranch of the Canal du Midi, divides Narbonne into two 
distinct portions, the bourg and the cite. The latter is one of the 
oldest and most interesting of French towns. The former 
cathedral (St Just), which consists only of a choir 130 ft. high 
and transept, was begun in 1272, and the transept was still un- 
finished at the end of the 15th century. The towers (194 ft. high) 
at each extremity of the transept were built about 1480. Some 
additions towards the west were made early in the 18th century. 
An unusual effect is produced by a double row of crenel! ation 
taking the place of balustrades on the roof of the choir chapels 
and connecting the pillars of the flying buttresses. Among the 
sepulchral monuments, which are the chief feature of the interior, 
may be noticed the alabaster tomb of Cardinal Guillaume 
Briconnet, minister of state under Charles VIII. The chapter- 
house, of the 15th century, has a vaulted roof supported on four 
free pillars. The treasury preserves many interesting relics. 
The apse of the cathedral was formerly joined to the fortifications 
of the archiepiscopal palace, and the two buildings are still con- 
nected by a mutUated cloister of the 14th and 15th centuries. 
On the front of the palace are three square towers of unequal 
height. Between the Tour des Telegraphes (1318), crenellated 
and turreted at the corners, and that of St Martial (1374), machj- 
colated and pierced by Gothic openings, a new facade was erected 
in the style of the 13th century after the plans of Viollet-le-Duc. 
This portion of the building now serves as h6tel de ville, and its 
upper stories are occupied by the Narbonne museum of art 
and archaeology, which includes a fine collection of pottery. 
The palace garden also contains many fragments of Roman work 
once built into the now dismantled fortifications; and the 
Musee Lapidaire in the Lamourguier buildings (formerly the 
church of a Benedictine convent) has a collection of Roman 
remains derived from the same source. The church of St Paul, 
though partly Romanesque, is in the main striking, and for the 
south of France a rare example of a building of the first half of 
the 13th century in the Gothic style of the north. It possesses 
some ancient Christian sarcophagi and fine Renaissance wood 
carving. Narbonne has a sub-prefecture, tribunals of first 
instance and of commerce, a board of trade arbitration, a chamber 
of commerce, a communal college for boys and a school of 
commerce and industry. It has a good trade in wine and 
spirituous liquors, and is famous for its honey. The industries 
include cooperage, sulphur-refining, brandy-distilling and the 
manufacture of hricks and tiles and verdigris. 

Long before the Roman invasion of Gaul Narbonne was a flourish- 
ing city, being capital of the Volcae Tectosages. It was there that 
the Romans in 118 B.C. founded their first colony in Gaul, which 
bore the name^ of Narbo Martins; they constructed great works 
to protect the city from inundation and to improve its port, situated 
on a lake now filled up but at that time communicating with the sea. 
Capital of Gallia Narbonensis, the seat of a proconsul and a station 
for the Roman fleet, Narbo Martius became the rival of Massilia. 
But in a.d. 150' it suffered greatly from a conflagration, and the 
division of Gallia Narbonensis into two provinces lessened its im- 
portance as a capital. Alans, Sueyi, Vandals, each held the city 
for a brief space, and at last, in 413, it was occupied by the Visigoths, 
whose capital it afterwards became. In 719, after a siege of two 
years, it was captured by the Saracens, and by them its fortifica- 
tions were restored and extended. Charles Martel, after the battle 
of Poitiers, and Pippin the Short, in 752, were both repulsed from 
its walls; but on a new attempt, after an investment of seven years, 
and by aid of a traitor, the Franks managed again to force their 
way into Narbonne. Charlemagne made the city the capital of the 
duchy of Gothia, and divided it into three lordships — one for the 
bishop, another for a Frankish lord, and the third for the Jews, who, 
occupying their own quarter, possessed schools, synagogues and a 
university famous in the middle ages. The viscounts who succeeded 
the Frankish lord sometimes acknowledged the authority of the 
counts of Toulouse, sometimes that of the counts of Barcelona. 
In the 13th century the crusade against the Albigenses spared the 
city, but the archbishopric was seized by the pope's legate, Arnaud 
Amaury, who took the title of viscount of Narbonne. Simon de 
Montfort, however, deprived him of this dignity, receiving from 
Philip Augustus the duchy of Narbonne along with the county of 
Toulouse. By his expulsion of the Jews Philip the Fair hastened 
the decay of the city; and about the same period the Aude, which 
had formerly been diverted by the Romans, ceased to flow towards 
Narbonne and the harbour, was silted up, tothe further disadvantage 
of the place. In 16^ Henri Marquis de_ Cinq-Mars was arrested at 
Narbonne for conspiring against Richelieu. United to the French 
crownin 1507, Narbonne was enclosed by a new line of walls under 
Francis I., but having ceased to be a garrison town it had the last 
portions of its ramparts demolished in 1870. The^ archbishopric 
was founded about the middle of the 3rd century, its first holder 
being Sergius Paulus; it was suppressed in 1790. 


NARBONNE-LARA, LOUIS MARIE JACQUES AMALRIC, 
comte de (1755-1813), French soldier and diplomatist, was born 
at Colorno, in the duchy of Parma, on the 24th of August 1755. 
He was the son of one of the ladies-in-waiting of Elizabeth, 
duchess of Parma, and his father was either a Spanish nobleman 
or — as has been alleged — Louis XV. himself. He was brought 
up at Versailles with the princesses of France, and was made 
colonel at the age of twenty-five. He became marichal-de- 
camp in 1791, and, through the influence of Madame de Stael, 
was appointed minister of war. But he showed incapacity in 
this post, gave in his resignation, and joined the Army of the 
North. Incurring suspicion as a Feuillant and also by his policy 
at the war office, he emigrated after the 10th of August 1792, 
visited England, Switzerland and Germany, and returned to 
France in 1801. In 1809 he re-entered the army as general of 
division, and was subsequently minister plenipotentiary at 
Munich and aide de camp to Napoleon. In 18 13 he was appointed 
French ambassador at Vienna, where he was engaged in an un- 
equal diplomatic duel with Metternich (q.v.) during the fateful 
months that witnessed the defection of Austria from the cause 
of Napoleon to that of the Allies. He died at Torgau, in Saxony, 
on the 17th of November 1813. 

See A. F. Villemain, Souvenirs contemperains (Paris, 1854). 


NARBOROUGH, SIR JOHN (d. 1688), English naval com- 
mander, was descended from an old Norfolk family. He received 
his commission in 1664, and in 1666 was promoted lieutenant 
for gallantry in the action with the Dutch fleet off the Downs 
in June of that year. After the peace he was chosen to conduct 
a voyage of exploration in the South Seas. He set sail from 
Deptford on the 26th of November 1669, and entered the Straits 
of Magellan in October of the following year, but returned home 
in June 1671 without accomplishing his original purpose. A 
narrative of the expedition was published at London in 1694 
under the title An Account oj sever al late Voyages and Discoveries 
to the South and North. During the second Dutch War Nar- 
borough was second captain of the lord high-admiral's ship the 
" Prince," and conducted himself with such conspicuous valour 
at the battle of Solebay (Southwold Bay) in May 1672 that he 
won special approbation, and shortly afterwards was made rear- 
admiral and knighted. In 1675 he was sent to suppress the 
Tripoline piracies, and by the bold expedient of despatching 
gun-boats into the harbour of Tripoli at midnight and burning 
the ships he induced the dey to agree to a treaty. Shortly after 
his return he undertook a similar expedition against the Algerincs. 
In 1680 he was appointed commissioner of the navy, an office he 
held till his death in 1688. He was buried at Knowlton church, 
Kent, where a monument has been erected to his memory. 
See Charnock, Biog. Nov. i.; Hist. MSS. Comm. 12th Rept. 
NARCISSUS, in Greek mythology, son of the river god 
Cephissus and the nymph Leiriope, distinguished for his beauty. 
The seer Teiresias told his mother that he would have a long 
life, provided he never looked upon his own features. His 
rejection of the love of the nymph Echo (q.v.) drew upon him 
the vengeance of the gods. Having fallen in love with his own 
reflection in the waters of a spring, he pined away (or killed him- 
self) and the flower that bears his name sprang up on the spot 
where he died. According to Pausanias, Narcissus, to console 
himself for the death of a favourite twin-sister, his exact counter- 
part, sat gazing into the spring to recall her features by his own. 
Narcissus, representing the early spring-flower, which for a brief 
space beholds itself mirrored in the water Pnd then fades, is one 
of the many youths whose premature death is recorded in Greek 
mythology (cf. Adonis, Linus, Hyacinthus); the flower itself 
was regarded as a symbol of such death. It was the last flower 
gathered by Persephone before she was carried off by Hades, 
and was sacred to Demeter and Core (the cult name of Perse- 
phone), the great goddesses of the underworld. From its 
associations Wieseler takes Narcissus himself to be a spirit of 
the underworld, of death and rest. It is possible that the story 
may have originated in the superstition (alluded to by Arte- 
midorus, Oneirocritica, ii. 7) that it was an omen of death to 
dream of seeing one's reflection in water. 

See Ovid, Metam. iii. 341-510; Pausanias ix. 31; Conon, 
Narrationes, 24; F. Wieseler, Narkissos (1856); Greve in Roscher's 
Lexikon der Mythologie; J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough (1900), i. 
293- 


NARCISSUS, a genus of bulbous plants belonging to the 
family Amaryllidaceae, natives of central Europe and the 
Mediterranean region; one species N. Tazetta, extends through 
Asia to Japan. From these, or rather from some of these, by 

cultivation and hybridization, have arisen the very numerous 
modern varieties. The plants have long narrow leaves spring- 
ing from the bulb and a central scape bearing one or more' 
generally large, white or yellow, drooping or inclined flowers, 
which are enveloped, before opening in a membranous 
spathe. The flowers are regular, with a perianth springing from 
above the ovary, tubular below, with spreading segments and a 
central corona; the six stamens are inserted within the tube. 
The most interesting feature botanically is the " corona " or 
" cup," which springs from the 

Fig. 1. — Flowers of Narcissus base of the flower-segments. 
(Narcissus Tazetta) bursting from This gives the special char- 
the sheathing bract or spathe, 6. acter to the flowerj and the 

members of the genus are classified according to the length 
of this organ as compared with that of the segments. The 
most probable supposition is that the cup is simply an 
excrescence or " enation " from the mouth of the flower-tube, 
and is connected with the fertilization of the flowers by insect 
agency. 

There are five well-marked sections. 

1. The hoop-petticoat narcissi, sometimes separated as the genus 
Corbularia, are not more than from 3 to 6 in. in height, and have 
grassy foliage and yellow or white flowers. These have the coronet 
in the centre of the flower very large in proportion to the other parts, 
and much expanded, like the old hooped petticoats. They are now 
all regarded as varieties or forms of the common hoop-petticoat* 
N. Bulbocodium, which has comparatively large bright yellow 
flowers; N. tenuifolius is smaller and somewhat paler and with 
slender erect leaves ; ^ N. citrinus is pale lemon yellow and larger ; 
while N. monophyttus is white. The small bulbs should be taken up 
in summer and replanted in autumn and early winter, according 
to the state of the season. They bloom about March or April in the 
open air. The soil should be free and open, so that water may pass 
off readily. 

2. A second group is that of the Pseudonarcissi, constituting the 
genus Ajax of some botanists, of which the daffodil, N. Pseudo- 
narcissus is the type. The daffodil (fig. 2)js common in woods and 

	Fig. 2. — Daffodil — (Narcissus Pseudonarctssus) — J nat. size. 
	1, Flower cut open; 2, pistil; 3, horizontal plan of flower. 

thickets in most partsofthe north of Europe, but is rare in Scotland- 
Its leaves are five or six in number, are about 1 ft. in length and 1 in. 
in breadth, and have a blunt keel and flat edges. The stem is about 
18 in. long and the spathe single-flowered. The flowers are large* 
yellow, scented and a little drooping, with a corolla deeply cleft 
into six lobes and a bell-shaped corona which is crisped at the 
margin ; they appear in March or April. In this species the corona 
is also very large and prominent, but is more elongated and trumpet- 
shaped, while the other members are regarded as subspecies or 
varieties of this. Of this group the most striking one perhaps is 
N, bicolor, which has the perianth almost white and the corona 
deep yellow; it yields a number of varieties, some of the best known 
being Empress, Horsfieldi, Grandee, Ellen Willmott, Victoria, 
Weardale Perfection, &c. N. moschatus, a native of the Pyrenees 
and the Spanish peninsula, is a cream-coloured subspecies of great 
beauty with several forms. N. cyclamineus is a pretty dwarf sub- 
species, native of Portugal, with narrow linear leaves and drooping 
flowers with reflexed lemon-yellow segments and an orange-yellow 
corona N. major is a robust form with leaves ^-f in. broad and bright 
lemon-yellow flowers 2-2 J in. long; maximus is a closely-related but 
still finer form; obvallaris (the Tenby daffodil) is an early form with 
uniformly yellow flowers. N. miner and minimus are miniature 
repetitions of the daffodil. All these grow well in good garden soil, 
and blossom from March onwards, coming in very early in genial 
seasons. 

3. Another group, the mock narcissi or star daffodils, with coronets 
of medium size, includes the fine and numerous varieties of N. 
incomparabilis, one of which, with large, double flowers, is known 
as butter-and-eggs ; N. odorus, known as the campernelle jonquil, 
has two to four uniform bright yellow flowers, and is considered a 
hybrid between N. Jonquilla and N. Pseudonarcissus. A form with 
sweet-scented double flowers is known as Queen Ann's jonquil; 
N. juncifolius, a graceful little plant from Spain, Portugal and south 
France, has one to four small bright yellow flowers on each scape. 
The hardier forms of this set thrive in the open border, but the 
smaller sorts, like Queen Ann's ionquU. are better taken up in 
autumn and replanted in February; they bloom freely about April 
or May. N. triandrus — Ganymeae's Cup — is a pretty little species 
with white flowers about 1 in. long; in several of its varieties the 
flowers are a pale or deeper yellow; they make attractive pot plants. 

4. The polyanthus or bunch narcissi form another well-marked 
group, whose peculiarity of producing many flowers on the stem is 
indicated by the name. In these the corona is small and shallow 
as compared with the perianth. Some of the hardier forms, as 
AT. Tazetta itself, the type of the group, succeed in the open borders 
in light well-drained soil, but the bulbs should be deeply planted, 
not less than 6 or 8 in. below the surface, to escape risk of injury 
from frost. Many varieties of this form of narcissus, such as Grand 
Monarque, Paper white, Soleil d'or, are grown. They admit of 
being forced into early bloom, like the hyacinth and tulip. They 
vary with a white, creamy or yellow perianth, and a yellow, lemon, 
primrose or white cup or coronet; and, being richly fragrant, they 
are general favourites amongst spring flowers. Many tons of these 
flowers are exported from the Scilly Isles to the London markets in 
spring. The " Chinese sacred lily " or "joss flower " is a form of 
N. Tazetta. The jonquil, N. Jonquilla, with yellow flowers, a native 
of south Europe and Algeria, of which there are single and double 
flowered varieties, is also grown in pots for early flowering, but does 
well outside in a warm border. 

5. There remains another little group, the poet's or pheasant's- 
eye narcissi (N. poeticus), in which the perianth is large, spreading 
and conspicuous, and the corona very small and shallow. These 
pheasant s-eye narcissi, of which there are several well-marked 
varieties, as radiiflorus, poetarum, recurvus, &c, blossom in succession 
during April and May, and all do well in the open borders as perma- 
nent hardy bulbs. N. biflorus, the primrose peerless, a two-flowered 
whitish yellow-cupped species, equally hardy and easy of culture, is 
a natural hybrid between N. poeticus and Tazetta. N. gracilis, a 
yellow-flowered species, has also been regarded as a hybrid between 
N. Tazetta and N. juncifolius, and blooms later. 

Of late years some remarkably fine hybrids have been raised 
between the various distinct groups of narcissi, and the prices asked 
for the bulbs in many cases are exceedingly high. One of the most 
distinct groups is that known under the name of " Poetaz " — a 
combination of poeticus and Tazetta. The best forms of poeticus 
ornatus have been crossed with the bunch-flowered Tazettas, and 
have resulted in producing varieties with large trusses of exquisite 
flowers more or less resembling the ornatus parents, and varying in 
colour from the purest white to yellow, the rim of the corona being in 
most cases conspicuously and charmingly coloured with red or 
crimson. This is an excellent group for cutting purposes, but it will 
take a few more years to make the varieties common. 

For an account of the history and culture of the narcissus see 
F. W. Burbidge, The Narcissus (1875); a more recent scientific 
treatment of the genus will be found in J. G. Baker's Handbook of 
AmaryUideae (1888); see also Nicholson, Dictionary of Gardening 
(1886) ; and J. Weathers, Practical Guide to Garden Plants (1901). 


NARCOTICS (Gr. vapKuniKos, making numb), a general term 
for substances having the physiological action, in a healthy 
animal, of producing lethargy or stupor, which may pass into 
a state of profound coma or unconsciousness along with complete 
paralysis, terminating in death. Certain substances of this class 
are used in medicine for the relief of pain, and are then called 
anodynes, whilst another group produce profound sleep, and are 
consequently known as hypnotics. In one sense, anaesthetics, 
such as chloroform and ether, may be held to be narcotics, but, 
as they are usually volatile substances causing unconsciousness 
for a comparatively short time, they are conveniently separated 
from the true narcotics, the effects of which are much more 
lasting. These distinctions are to a great extent artificial, 
as it is evident that a substance capable of producing partial 
insensibility to pain, or sleep, will inevitably in larger doses 
cause profound coma ending in death. Hence we find the same 
substances sometimes classed as anodynes and at other times 
as hypnotics. For example, small doses of opium, or of one or 
other of its preparations, relieve pain, whilst larger doses act 
as hypnotics, causing deep sleep passing into coma. Cannabis 
Indica, belladonna and hyoscyamus, are also anodyne in their 
action. The chief narcotics are mentioned below. 

Opium is the inspissated juice of the Papaver somniferum, co 
lining 7-5 to 10*5% of anhydrous morphine. Besides morphi: 

con- 
taining 7-5 to 10*5 % of anhydrous morphine. Besides morphine 
some of the other alkaloids contained in it are of a narcotic nature, 
notably papaverine, narceine, meconine, cryptopine and narcotine, 
but the principal anodyne and narcotic effects are due to the mor- 
phine alkaloid. Though seasoned opium takers may take 20 to 30 
grs. without noticeable effects, I to 3 grs. produces marked symptoms 
in the western races. Idiosyncrasy is marked in regard to the 
amount of opium a person can safely take. The medicinal dose is 
up to 2 grs., and the smallest dose that has been known to cause 
death in an adult is £ gr. The narcotic properties of Morphine vary 
as to whether it is taken by the stomach or injected under the skin; 
2 jjrs. by the stomach is dangerous, and a safe medicinal dose by the 
skin is \ to \ gr. The smallest dose that has produced death in an 
adult was i gr. given hypodermically. The motor centres of the 
brain and spinal cord are first stimulated by opium and morphine 
and later depressed; death in fatal cases being from paralysis of 
the respiratory centre of the medulla. For the treatment of poisoning 
see under Opium. 

Cannabis indica or Indian Hemp (see Hemp). — The part used in 
medicine is the non-fertilized female spikes of the Cannabis^ sativa. 
The active constituent is the resin containing cannabin with the 
active^ principle cannabinol, the alkaloids cannabinene and tetano- 
canabine. Cannabis indica is sold in the East under various names. 
A confection of the drug made in Arabia is called hashisch. Churrus 
is the resin scraped off the leaves, and the dried leaf is called bang, 
gunga or ganga being the name given to the dried flowering tops sold 
for smoking. The medicinal dose is J to 1 gr. of the extract, 2 to 3 
grs. is a poisonous dose, but there is no recorded fatal case in man. 
In Eastern countries the smoking of Cannabis indica produces a 
form of mania. The effects of smaller doses are intoxication of a 
pleasant character, exaltation, hallucinations and delirium, later 
dilatation of the pupils, drowsiness, sleep and coma. Indian hemp 
is an uncertain anodyne and hypnotic. When large quantities have 
been taken an emetic should be given or the stomach pump used, 
and endeavour to allay excitement until the effects have passed off. 

Belladonna and Atropine. — The leaves of the A tropa Belladonna 
or deadly nightshade of which the active principle is atropine 
principally used as a sulphate. A small dose of belladonna or atro- 
pine causes dryness of the throat and mouth, dilatation of the pupils, 
dimness of vision except for distant objects and often double vision. 
The pulse becomes quick, rising, in an adult, from 80 to 120 or 160 
beats per minute; and there is often a bright red flush over the skin. 
The intellectual powers are at first acute and strong, but they soon 
become confused. There is giddiness, confusion of thought, excite- 
ment, a peculiar talkative wakeful restiveness, in which the person 
shows that his mind is occupied by a train of fancies or is haunted 
by visions and spectres. Often there is violent delirium before sleep 
comes on. The sleep after a large dose deepens into stupor, with 
great muscular prostration or paralysis. During all the time the 
pupils are widely dilated. Death occurs from failure both of the 
heart's action and of respiration. The minimum lethal dose is not 
known, but 80 grs. of the root have caused death ; A to ^ gr. 
hypodermically have caused dangerous symptoms and \ gr. would 
almost certainly be fatal. For the medicinal preparations and 
treatment of poisoning see Belladonna. 

Stramonium. — The part of the plant used is the leaves and seed 
of the Datum Stramonium or thorn apple, the alkaloidal constituent 
being daturine, a variable mixture of hyoscinc and atropine. The 
physiological action is almost identical with belladonna. Poisoning 
is usually due to children eating the seeds; the lethal dose is un- 
known. The symptoms produced are divided into three stages- 
delirium, sleep and deep coma. In case of slight poisoning a rash is 
one of the toxic symptoms. The treatment of poisoning is to give 
emetics, wash out the stomach and give stimulants^ and pilocarpine 
subcutaneously, also to apply warmth and to use artificial respiration 
if necessary. 

Hyoscyamus, the leaves of the Hyoscyamus niger or henbane (tf.v.). 
The active principle is hyoscyamine. " The physiological action is 
almost similar to belladonna, with excitement and cardiac stimu- 
lation and afterwardsdepression and stupor, but the action of hyos- 
cyamus on the heart is more powerful. In large doses it is a strong 
cerebral depressant, and produces dilatation of the pupil ; ^ gr. 
of hyoscamine produces marked effects, sleepiness and dryness of tKe 
mouth; \ gr. by subcutaneous injection has produced fatal results. 
The treatment of hyoscyamus poisoning is similar to that of stra- 
monium. 

Hops (the Humulus Lupulus), containing the active principle 
lupuhne, and Lactucarium, the juice of the Lactuca virosa (lettuce), 
containing an alkaloid lactucine, are very feeble narcotics, causing 
heaviness and sleep if taken in large doses. 

Chloral Hydrate is a pure hypnotic which in larger doses is a 
powerful narcotic, producing prolonged sleep with depression of the 
cardiac and motor centres. It is an intrinsic cardiac poison, the 
heart being arrested in diastole, with coincident respiratory failure. 
Chloral hydrate is not uniform in its action, some people manifesting 
great susceptibility to the drug. It is safe in small doses of 10 to 
20 grs. It is difficult to say what is a lethal dose. Cases are recorded 
of recovery after 336 grs. taken with an equal amount of potassium 
bromide and even after a dose of 595 grs., but in susceptible persons 
10 to 15 grs. have produced toxic symptoms and death has occurred 
after doses of from 30 to 45 grs. If seen early, the treatment is an 
emetic, but if the poison should have been already absorbed, stimu- 
lants, hot coffee, strychnine or digitalin hypodermically, with 
perhaps artificial respiration, may be required. 

Alcohol in large quantities is a strong narcotic, producing the 
typical stages of preliminary excitement followed by drowsiness 
and profound coma, during which death may occur. The treatment 
is washing out the stomach to prevent the absorption of the poison 
and the use of strychnine hypodermically. 


NARDI, JACOPO (b. 1476), Florentine historian, occupied 
various positions in the service of the Florentine republic after the 
expulsion of the Medici in 1494, and even on their return in 1512 
he continued in the public service. In 1527 he joined in the 
movement for the expulsion of the family and was instrumental 
in defeating the Medicean troops under Cardinal Passerini, who 
were attacking the Palazzo della Signoria. When the Medici 
again definitely became masters of Florence in 1530, Nardi was 
exiled from the city and his property confiscated. He spent the 
rest of his days in various parts of Italy, chiefly in Venice, and 
wrote a statement of the claims of the Florentine exiles against 
the Medici, addressed to the emperor Charles V. The exact 
date of his death is unknown. His chief work is his Istorie della 
Citld di Firenze, covering the period from 1498 to 1538, in part 
based on Biagio Buonaccorsi's Diario. 

L. Arbib's edition of Nardi's history (Florence, 1842) contains a 
biography of the author, and so does that of Agenore Gelli (Florence, 
1888). 


NARES, SIR GEORGE STRONG (1831- ), English Arctic 
explorer, son of a captain in the navy, was educated at the 
Royal Naval College at New Cross, and entered the navy in 
1846. After being employed for some time on the Australian 
station, in 1852 he became mate of the " Resolute " in the 
Arctic expedition which was sent out in that year. Serving in the 
Crimea upon his return, he was appointed lieutenant in charge 
of the naval cadets on the inauguration of the " Britannia " 
training ship, and was then employed in surveying work on the 
N.E. coast of Australia and in the Mediterranean, attaining the 
rank of captain in 1869. While in command of the " Challenger " 
(1872-1874), in the famous voyage of deep-sea exploration 
round the world, he was ordered home to take command of the 
Arctic expedition which set sail in the spring of 1875 in the ships 
" Alert " and " Discovery." He published a narrative of the 
voyage on his return, and for his services was made K.C.B. 
(1876). Two years later he was sent in command of the " Alert " 
to survey Magellan Strait. From 1879 to 1896 he was attached 
to the Harbour Department of the Board of Trade. He retired 
from active service in 1886, and became a vice-admiral in 
1892. (See Polar Regions.) 


NARGILE or Nargileh, the Persian and Turkish name for a 
" hookah," a tobacco pipe with a long flexible tube for stem 
passing through a vessel containing water, often perfumed. 
This bowl was originally made of a coco-nut (Persian ndrgil), 
whence the name, but now glass, metal or porcelain, are also 
used. 


NARNI (anc. Umbrian Nequinum, Rom. Narnia), a town and 
episcopal see of the province of Perugia, Italy, 65 m. N. of Rome 
by rail. Pop. (1901) 5200 (town), 12,773 (commune). It is 
picturesquely situated on a lofty rock (787 ft. above sea-level), 
480 ft. above the Nera valley, at the point where the river 
traverses a narrow ravine, and commands a fine view. The 
cathedral and the portico of S. Maria della Pensola are buildings 
of the nth century with flat arches; the former has some good 
Renaissance sculptures. There are other interesting 'churches; 
S. Francesco has a good doorway of the 14th century. In the 
town hall is a " Coronation of the Virgin " by D. Ghirlandaio. 
The town also contains some picturesque Gothic houses and 
palaces. Near the station, below the town, are factories of 
india-rubber and calcium carbide. 

The Umbrian Nequinum was taken by the Romans after a long 
sie^e in 299 B.C., and a colony planted there against the Umbrians, 
taking its name from the river. It was among the twelve colonies 
that were punished for refusing help to Rome in 209 B.C. It was 
considered a suitable point to oppose a threatened march of Has- 
drubal on Rome. It stood on the Via Flaminia, the great bridge 
of which over the river lies below the town. The original main road 
ran to Nuceria by Mevania; a branch by Interamna and Spoletium 
joined it at Forum Flaminii. According to some authors, the 
emperor Nerva was born at Narnia. The town is mentioned in the 
history of the Gothic wars. Procopius (B.G. i. 17) describes the 
site of the town, the river and the bridge — the latter as built by 
Augustus, and as having the highest arches that he knew. In the 
middle ages Narni was under the papal power. It was the birthplace 
of the well-known condottiere Erasmo Gattamelata. 

See G. Eroli, Miscellanea Storica Narnese (2 vols., Narni, 1858- 
1862), and other works by the same author. 


NARRAGANSETT, a township of Washington county, Rhode 
Island, U.S.A. on the W. shore of Narragansett Bay, about 25 m. 
S. of Providence and about 8 m. W.S.W. of Newport. Pop. 
(1890) 1408; (1900) 1523; (1905) 1469; (1910) 1250. Area 
about 15 sq. m. It is connected at Kingston Station (about 
9 m. N.W.) by the Narragansett Pier railway with the shore line 
of the New York, New Haven & Hartford railway; an electric 
line connects with Providence. The southern part of the town- 
ship is a peninsula, lying between the mouth of Narragansett 
Bay and an inlet separating this part of the township from 
South Kingstown. Narragansett Pier, within the township, has 
a fine bathing beach, which extends along the indented coast 
between the village and the mouth of the Pattaquamscutt river; 
the force of the surf is somewhat broken by Point Judith, about 
5 m. S. (also in the township), on which there is a lighthouse. 
On a ridge overlooking the ocean and commanding a fine view is 
the Point Judith Country Club, with golf courses, tennis courts 
and a polo-field, on which is held a horse show at the close of 
each season. Many of the summer visitors at Narragansett Pier 
are from New England, New York and Philadelphia, but there 
is a sufficient number from Baltimore, Washington, Richmond, 
Louisville and other Southern cities to give to its society a 
noticeably Southern tone. Narragansett Pier was so-named 
from the piers that were built here late in the 18th century and 
early in the 19th to provide a port for the Narragansett Country, 
or southern Rhode Island, and it still has a coal wharf, and a 
yacht landing at the Casino. The development of the place as a 
summer resort was begun about the middle of the 19th century 
by the erection of a bathing-house and the conversion of some 
farm houses into boarding houses. The erection of large hotels 
and private residences soon followed, and the completion of the 
railway to the pier in 1876 increased its popularity. The District 
of Narragansett (in the town of South Kingstown) was organized 
in 1888 and in 1901 was incorporated as a separate township. 

The town is named from the Narraganset Indians, a once- 
powerful Algonquian tribe, which occupied much of the shore of 
Narragansett Bay. Under their chief Canonicus (d. 1647) they 
were friendly to the early Rhode Island settlers, and under 
Miantonomo (q.v.) entered into a tripartite treaty with the 
Connecticut colonists and the Mohegans; but after the execu- 
tion of Miantonomo the Narragansets under Miantonomo's son, 
Canonchet or Nanuntenoo, were less friendly. Their loyalty 
to the whites was suspected at the time of King Philip's War, 
and on the 19th of December 1675, at the Great or Cedar Swamp- 
(Narragansett Fort) in the present town of South Kingstown 
(immediately west of the town of Narragansett), they were 
decisively defeated by the whites, under Governor Josiah Winslow 
of the Plymouth Colony. The site of the engagement is marked 
by a granite monument erected in 1906 by the Rhode Island 
Society of Colonial Wars. Canonchet escaped, but on the 2nd of 
August 1676 was captured near Stonington, Connecticut, and on 
the following day was executed. Most of the survivors of the 
tribe were later settled among the Niantic, to whom the name 
Narraganset has been transferred. There are now few survivors 
of pure Indian blood. 


NARSES, Narseh, Narseus, king of Persia, son of Shapur I. 
He rose as pretender to the throne against his grand-nephew 
Bahram III. in a.d. 292, and soon became -sole king. He attacked 
the Romans, but after defeating the emperor Galerius near 
Cailinicum on the Euphrates in 296 was completely defeated in 
297, and forced to conclude a peace, by which western Meso- 
potamia and five provinces on the left bank of the upper Tigris 
were ceded to the Romans and their sovereignty over the 
kingdom of Armenia was acknowledged. This peace, concluded 
in 297, lasted for forty years. Narses died in 303 and was 
succeeded by his son Hormizd II. (Ed. M.) 


NARSES (c. 478-573) an important officer of Justinian, in 
the 6th century. He was a eunuch, but we are nowhere distinctly 
informed that he was of servile origin. A native of Persarmenia 
(that portion of Armenia which was allotted to Persia by the 
partition of 384), he may have been prepared and educated by 
his parents for service in an oriental court. If the statement that 
he died at the age of ninety-five be correct, he was born about 
478. He was probably brought young to Constantinople, and 
attained a footing in the officium of the grand chamberlain. He 
rose to be one of the three (spectabiles) " chartularii," a position 
implying some literary attainment, and involving the custody of 
the archives of the household. Hence, probably in middle life, he 
became " praepositus sacri cubiculi," an "illustris," and entitled 
along with the praetorian prefects and the generals to the highest, 
rank at the imperial court. In this capacity, in 530, he received 
into the emperor's obedience another Narses, a fellow-country- 
man, with his two brothers, Aratius and Isaac. These Pers- 
armenian generals, having formerly fought under the standard 
of Persia, now in consequence of the successes of Belisarius trans- 
ferred their allegiance to the emperor Justinian, came to Con- 
stantinople, and received costly gifts from' the great minister. 

In 532 the insurrection known as the Nika broke out in 
Constantinople, when for some hours the throne of Justinian 
seemed doomed to overthrow. It was saved partly by the 
courage of his wife, Theodora, and partly by the timely prodigality 
of Narses, who stole out into the capital, and with large sums 
of money bribed the leaders of the " blue " faction, which was 
aforetime loyal to the emperor, to shout as of old " Justiniane 
Auguste tu vincas." 

The African and Italian wars followed. In the fourth year 
of the latter war (538) the splendid successes of Belisarius 
had awakened both joy and fear in the heart of his master. 
Reinforcements were sent into Italy, and Narses was placed 
at their head. Belisarius understood that Narses came to serve 
under him like any other officer of distinguished but subordinate 
rank, and he received a letter from Justinian which seemed to 
support this conclusion. But the friends of Narses continually 
plied him with suggestions that he, a great officer of the house- 
hold, in the secrets of the emperor, had been sent to Italy, not 
to serve as a subaltern, but to hold independent command and 
win military glory for himself. The truth probably lay between 
the two. Justinian could not deprive his great general of the 
supreme command, yet he wished to have a very powerful 
emissary of the court constantly at his side. He would have 
him watched but not hampered." 

The two generals met (a.d. 538) at Fermo on the Adriatic 
coast. The first interference of Narses with the plans of Belisarius 
was beneficial. John, one of the officers highest in rank under 
Belisarius, had pressed on to Rimini, contrary to the instructions 
of his chief, leaving in his rear the difficult fortress of Osimo 
(Auximum) untaken. His daring march had alarmed the Goths 
for Ravenna, and induced them to raise the siege of Rome; 
but he himself was now shut up in Rimini, and on the point of 
being forced by famine to surrender. Belisarius and his followers 
were prepared to let him pay the penalty of his rashness and 
disobedience. But his friend Narses so insisted on the blow to 
the reputation of the imperial arms which would be produced 
by the surrender of Rimini that he carried the council of war 
with him, and Belisarius had to plan a brilliant march across 
the mountains, in conjunction with a movement by the fleet, 
whereby Rimini was relieved while Osimo was still untaken. 
When Belisarius and John met, the latter ostentatiously thanked 
Narses alone for his preservation. 

His next use of his authority was less fortunate. Milan, 
which was holding out for the Romans, was also hard pressed by 
famine. The two generals who were sent to relieve it loitered 
disgracefully over their march, and, when Belisarius wished to 
despatch further reinforcements, the commanders of these 
new troops refused to stir till Narses gave them orders. Belisarius 
wrote to the eunuch pointing out the necessity of unity of purpose 
in the imperial army. At length, grudgingly, Narses gave his 
consent, and issued the required orders; but it was too late. 
Milan had been compelled by extremity of famine to surrender, 
and with it the whole province of Liguria fell into the hands of 
the enemy. This event forced Justinian to recognize the dangers 
of even a partially divided command, and he recalled Narses 
to Constantinople. 

Twelve years elapsed before Narses returned to Italy. Mean- 
while there had been great vicissitudes of fortune both for the 
Romans and the Goths. Italy, which appeared to have been 
won by the sword of Belisarius, had been lost again by the 
exactions and misgovernment of Alexander. Totila had raised 
up a new army, had more than kept Belisarius at bay in five 
difficult campaigns (544-548) and now held nearly all the country. 
Belisarius, however, in this his second series of campaigns, had 
, never been properly seconded by his master. In the spring of 
552 Narses set sail from Salona on the Dalmatian coast with a 
large and well-appointed army. It was a Roman army only 
in name. Lombards, Heruli, Huns, Gepidae and even Persians 
followed the standard of Narses, men equal in physical strength 
and valour to the Goths, and inspired by the liberal pay which 
they received, and by the hope of plunder. 

The eunuch seems to have led his army round the head of 
the Adriatic Gulf. By skilfully co-operating with his fleet, 
he was able to cross the rivers of Venetia without fighting the 
Gothic general Teias, who intended to dispute their passage. 
Having mustered all his forces at Ravenna, he marched south- 
ward. He refused to be detained before Rimini, being determined 
to meet the Gothic king as soon as possible with his army un- 
diminished. The occupation of the pass of Furlo (Petra Pertusa) 
by the Goths prevented his marching by the Via Flaminia, 
but, taking a short circuit, he rejoined the great road near CaglL 
A little farther on, upon the crest of the Appenines, he was met 
by Totila, who had advanced as far as Tadini, called by Procopius- 
Tagina. Parleys, messages and harangues by each general 
followed. At length the line of battle was formed, and the 
Gothic army, probably greatly inferior in number to the Byzan- 
tine was hopelessly routed (July 552), the king receiving a 
mortal wound as he was hurrying from the battlefield. 

With Totila fell the last hopes of the Gothic kingdom of Italy. 
Teias, who was proclaimed his successor, protracted for a few 
months a desperate resistance in the rocky peninsula of Castella- 
mare, overlooking the bay of Naples. At length want of provisions 
forced him into the plain, and there by the river Sarno, almost 
in sight of Pompeii, was fought (553) a battle which is generally 
named from the overlooking range of Mons Lactarius (Monte 
Lettere). The actual site of the battle, however, is about half 
a mile from the little town of Angri, and its memory is still vaguely 
preserved by the name Pozzo dei Goti (well of the Goths). In 
this battle Teias was killed- He was the last king of the 
Ostrogoths. 

The task of Narses, however, was not yet ended. By the 
invitation of the Goths an army of 75,000 warlike Alamanni 
and Franks, the subjects of King Theudibald, crossed the Alps 
under the command of two Alamannic nobles, the brothers 
Lothair and Buccelin (553). The great strategic talents of 
Narses were shown even more conspicuously in this, than in his 
previous and more brilliant campaigns. Against the small but 
gallant bands of Totila and Teias he had adopted the policy 
of rapid marches and imperative challenges to battle. His 
strategy in dealing with the great host from Gaul was of the 
Fabian kind. He kept them as long as he could north of the 
Apennines, while he completed the reduction of the fortresses 
of Tuscany. At the approach of winter he gathered his troops 
into the chief cities and declined operations in the field, while 
the Alamannic brothers marched through Italy, killing and 
plundering. When the spring of 554 appeared, Lothaire with 
his part of the army insisted on marching back to Gaul, there to 
deposit in safety the plunder which they had reaped. In an 
unimportant engagement near Pesaro he was worsted by the 
Roman generals, and this hastened his northward march. At 
Ceneda in Venetia he died of a raging fever. Pestilence broke 
out in his army, which was so wasted as to be incapable of 
further operations in Italy. Meanwhile his brother Buccelin, 
whose army was also suffering grievously from disease, partly 
induced by free indulgence in the grapes of Campania, encamped 
at Casilinum, the site of modern Capua. Here, after a time, 
Narses accepted the offered battle (554). The barbarians, whose 
army was in the form of a wedge, pierced the Roman centre. 
But by a most skilful manoeuvre Narses contrived to draw 
his lines into a curve, so that his mounted archers on each flank 
could aim their arrows at the backs of the troops who formed 
the otheY side of the Alamannic wedge. They thus fell in whole 
ranks by the hands of unseen antagonists. Soon the Roman 
centre, which had been belated in its march, arrived upon the 
field and completed the work of destruction. Buccelin and his 
whole army were destroyed, though we need not accept the 
statement of the Greek historian (Agathias ii. 9) that only five 
men out of the barbaric host of 30,000 escaped, and only eighty ' 
out of the Roman 18,000 perished. 

The only other important military operation of Narses which 
is recorded — and that indistinctly — is his defeat of the Herulian 
king Sindbal, who had served under him at Capua, but who 
subsequently revolted, was defeated, taken captive and hanged 
by the eunuch's order (565). In the main the thirteen years 
after the battle of Capua (554-567) were years of peace, and 
during them Narses ruled Italy from Ravenna with the title 
of prefect. 1 He rebuilt Milan and other cities destroyed in the 
Gothic War; and two inscriptions on the Salarian bridge at 
Rome have preserved to modern times the record of repairs 
effected by him in the year 564. 

His administration, however, was not popular. The effect 
of the imperial organization was to wring the last solidus out 
of the emaciated and fever-stricken population of Italy, and the 
belief of his subjects was that no small portion of their contribu- 
tions remained in the eunuch's private coffers. At the close of 
565 Justinian died, and a deputation of Romans waited upon 
his successor Justin II., representing that they found " the 
Greeks " harder taskmasters than the Goths, that Narses the 
eunuch was determined to reduce them all to slavery, and that 
unless he were removed they would transfer their allegiance 
to the barbarians. This deputation led to the recall of Narses 
in 567, accompanied, according to a somewhat late tradition, 
by an insulting message from the empress Sophia, who sent him 
a golden distaff, and bade him, as he was not a man, go and 
spin wool in the apartments of the women. " I will spin her 
such a hank," Narses is represented as saying, " that she shall 
not find the end of it in her lifetime "; and forthwith he sent 
messengers to the Lombards in Pannonia, bearing some of the 
fruits of Italy, and inviting them to enter the land which bore 
such goodly produce. Hence came the invasion of Alboin (568), 
which wrested the greater part of Italy from the empire, and 
changed the destinies of the peninsula. 2 

1 Gibbon's statement that Narses was " the first and most powerful 
of the exarchs " is more correct in substance than in form. The 
title of exarch does not appear to be given to Narses by any con- 
temporary writer. He is always " Praefectus Italiae," " Patncius " 
or ' Dux Italiae," except when he bears the style of his former 
offices in the imperial household. " Ex-Praepositus [Cubiculi]" or 
41 Chartularius." 

* This celebrated story seems to be unknown to strictly con- 
temporary authors. We find no hint of it in Agathias (who wrote 
between 566 and 582), in Marius (532-596), or in Gregory of Tours 
" (54 c >-594)- The possibly contemporary Liber Pontificalis and Isidore 
of Seville (560-636) hint at the invitation to the Lombards. Frede- 
garius (so-called), who probably wrote in the middle of the 7th 
century, and Paul the Deacon, towards the close of the 8th, supply 
the saga-like details, which become more minute the farther the 
narrators are from the action. On the whole, the transaction, 
though it is too well vouched for to allow us to dismiss it as entirely 
fabulous, cannot take its place among the undoubted facts of history. 

Narses, who had retired to Naples, was persuaded by the pope 
(John III.) to return to Rome. He died there about 573, and 
his body, enclosed in a leaden coffin, was carried to Constantinople 
and buried there. Several years after his death the secret of 
the hiding-place of his vast stores of wealth is said to have 
been revealed by an old man to the emperor Tiberius II., for 
whose charities to the poor and the captives they furnished an 
opportune supply. 

Narses was short in stature and lean in figure. His freehanded- 
ness and affability made him very popular with his soldiers. Eva- 
grius tells us that he was veryVeligious, and paid especial reverence 
to the Virgin, never engaging in battle till he conceived that she 
had given him the signal. Our best authorities for his life are his 
contemporaries Procopius and Agathias. See Gibbon, Decline and 
Fall, vols. iv. and v., edited by J. B. Bury (1898). (T. H.) 


NARSINGHGARH, a native state of Central India, in the 
Bhopal agency. Area, 741 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 92,093; esti- 
mated revenue, £33,000; tribute to Holkar, £4000. The chief, 
whose title is raja, is a Rajput of the Omat clan. The state was 
founded about 1681 by a minister of Rajgarh, who compelled 
the ruler of that state to transfer to him half his territory. 
The town of Narsinghgarh had a population in 1901 of 8778. 


NARSINGHPUR, a town and district of British India, in the 
*&&£udda division of the Central Provinces. The town is on the 
river Singri, and has a railway station 52 m. E. of Jubbulpore; 
pop. (1901) 11,233. The district has an area of 1976 sq. m. 
It forms a portion of the upper part of the Nerbudda valley. 
The first of those wide alluvial basins which, alternating with 
rocky gorges, give so varied a character to the river's course, 
opens out just below the famous marble rocks in Jubbulpore, and 
extends westward for 225 m., including the whole of Narsinghpur, 
together with the greater part of Hoshangabad. The Satpura 
hills to the south are here a generally regular range, nowhere 
more than 500 ft. above the plain, and running almost parallel 
to the river, at a distance of 15 or 20 m. In the intervening 
valley, the rich level of black wheat land is seldom broken, 
except by occasional mounds of gravel or nodular limestone, 
which afford serviceable village sites. Along the foot of the 
boundary hills the alluvium gives way to belts of red gravelly 
soil, rice and sugar-cane take the place of wheat, and forest trees 
that of mango groves. The population in 1901 was 315,518, 
showing a decrease of 14-5% in the decade, due to famine. 
The principal crops are wheat, millets, rice, pulses, oil-seeds 
and cotton. There are manufactures of cotton, silk, brass and 
iron-ware. At Mohpani are coal-mines. The Great Indian 
Peninsula railway runs through the district, with a branch to 
Mohpani. 

See Narsinghpur District Gazetteer (Bombay, 1906). 


NARTHEX (Gr. vap6i}£, the name of the plant giant-fennel, 
in Lat. ferula) , the name applied in architecture, probably from 
a supposed resemblance in shape to the reed-like plant, to the long 
arcaded porch forming the entrance into a Christian church, 
to which the catechumens and penitents were admitted. Some- 
times there was a second narthex or vestibule within the church, 
when the outer one was known as the exonarthex. In Byzantine 
churches this inner narthex formed part of the main structure 
of the church, being divided from it by a screen of columns. 
A narthex is found in some German churches, where, however, 
it had no ritual meaning but was introduced as a western 
transept to give more importance to the west end. One of the 
finest examples to be found in England is that of Ely cathedral, 
where -its northern portion, however, was apparently never 
completed. 


NARVA (Rugodiv of Russian annals, also Ivangorod), a seaport 
and fortress of Russia, in the government of St Petersburg, 
100 m. by rail W.S.W. of the city of St Petersburg. Pop. 
(1897) 16,577. It stands on the Narova river, which flows 
from Lake Peipus or Chudskoye, and enters the Gulf of Finland 
in Narva Bay, 8 m. below this town. The town was founded in 
1223 by Danes, and changed hands between the Teutonic 
knights, Danes, Swedes and Russians until it was taken by 
Peter the Great in 1704, after the Russians had suffered here a 
teriihle defeat at the hands of Charles XII. of Sweden four years 
before. Its fortress, built on the right bank of the river, and 
known as Ivangorod, has lost its importance, and was abandoned 
in 1864. The cathedral and the town hall (1683) contain 
interesting antiquities. There are here an arsenal, a small 
museum and a school of navigation. Several manufactories 
utilize the waterfalls of the Narova, e.g. cotton-mills, woollen 
cloth mills, flax and jute mills, saw-mills and steam flour mills. 
The total trade falls short of half a million sterling annually. A 
watering-place has grown up at Ust-Narova, or Hungerburg, at 
the mouth of the Narova. 


NARVACAN, a town of the province of Ilocos Sur, Luzon, 
Philippine Islands, near the coast and on the main road 13 m. 
S.S.E. of Vigan, the capital. Pop. (1903) 19,575. It lies in a 
level valley surrounded by mountains, and has a cool and healthy 
climate. The soil, both in the valley and on the neighbouring 
mountain-sides, is very fertile, and produces rice, vegetables, 
Indian corn, indigo, cotton, tobacco, maguey and sugar-cane. 
Cotton fabrics are woven by the women and sold to the mountain 
tribes. The language of the town is Ilocano. 


NARVAEZ, PANFILO DE (c. 1480-1528), Spanish adventurer, 
was an hidalgo of Castile, born at Valladolid about 1480. He 
was one of the subordinates of Velazquez in the reduction of 
Cuba, and, after having held various posts under his governor- 
ship, was put at the head of the force sent to the Aztec coast to 
compel Cortes to renounce his command; he was surprised and 
defeated, however, by his abler and more active compatriot at 
Cempoalla, and made prisoner with the loss of an eye (1520). 
After his return to Spain he obtained from Charles V. a grant of 
Florida as far as the River of Palms; sailing in 1527 with five 
ships and a force of about 600 men, he landed, probably near 
Pensacola Bay, in April 1528, and, striking inland with some 300 
of his followers, reached " Apalache " on June 25. The prospects 
of fabulous wealth which had sustained them in their difficult 
and perilous journey having proved illusory a return to the 
coast was determined, and the Bahia de los Caballos, at or near 
St Mark's, was reached in the following month. Having built 
rude boats, the much-reduced company sailed hence for Mexico 
on September 22, but the vessel which carried Narvaez was 
driven to sea in a storm and perished. His lieutenant, Cabeza 
de Vaca, with three others who ultimately reached land, made his 
way across Texas to the Gulf of California. (See Florida.) 

See Prescott, Conquest of Mexico ; H. H. Bancroft, Mexico (1882- 
1890); and the Naufragio of Alvaro Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in the 
Biblioteca of Rivadeneyra, xxii. . 


NARVAEZ, RAMON MARIA (1800-1868), Spanish soldier and 
statesman, was born at Loja, Granada, on the 4th of August 1800, 
entered the army at an early age, and saw active service under 
Mina in Catalonia in 1822. He was in his sympathies a Con- 
servative, and could not go all lengths with the Radical opposi- 
tion to Ferdinand VII., whom he served after his restoration. 
When the king died, Narvaez became one of the Conservative 
supporters of Isabel II. He achieved great popularity by his 
victory over Gomez, the Carlist general, near Arcos, in November 
1836, and after clearing La Mancha of brigands by a vigorous 
policy of suppression in 1838 he was appointed captain-general 
of Old Castile, and commander-in-chief of the army of reserve. 
In 1840, for the part he had taken at Seville in the insurrection 
against Espartero and the Progresista party, he was compelled 
to take refuge in France, where, in conjunction with Maria 
Cristina, he planned the expedition of 1843 which led to the 
overthrow of his adversary. In 1844 he became prime minister, 
and was created field-marshal and duke of Valencia, but his 
policy was too reactionary to be tolerated long, and he was 
compelled to quit office in February 1846. He now held the post 
of ambassador at Paris, until again called to preside over the 
council of ministers in 1847; but misunderstandings with 
Maria Cristina led to his resignation in the following year. 
His ministry succeeded that of O'Donnell for a short time in 
1856-1857, and he again returned to power for a few months 
in 1864-1865. He once more replaced O'Donnell in July 1866, 
and was still in office when he died at Madrid on the 23rd of 
April 1868. 

Some very curious notices of Narvaez may be found in the letters 
of Prosper Merimee to Panizzi (i88i) ; For his general political 
career see Hermann Baumgarten, Geschichte Spaniens v. Ausbruch d. 
franzos. RevoL bis auf unsere Tage (1865-1 871); and the Historia 
Contemporanea of Antonio Pirala (187 1-1879). 


NARVIK or Victoriahavn, a seaport on the Ofoten Fjord of 
the north-west coast of Norway, in Nordland ami (county), 
68° 30' N. It is wholly modern, developed by the construction 
and completion (1903) of the Ofoten railway, the most northerly 
in the world. There are extensive quays, from which is shipped 
the iron ore from the rich districts traversed by the line. Narvik 
is 167 m. N.W. of Gellivara, and 982 N. by W. of Stockholm by 
the railway. In summer express trains cover the whole distance 
in two days. Narvik is a convenient point from which to visit 
the beautiful Lofoten Islands. 


NARWHAL, the Scandinavian name of a cetacean (Monodon 
monoceros), characterized by the presence in the male of a long 
horn-like tusk. In the adult of both sexes there are only two 
teeth, both in the upper jaw, which lie horizontally side by side, 
and in the female remain throughout life concealed in cavities 
of the bone. In the male the right tooth usually remains similarly 
concealed, but the left is immensely developed, attaining a length 
equal to more than half that of the entire animal. In a narwhal 
12 ft. long, from snout to end of tail, the exserted portion of the 
tusk may measure 6 or 7 and occasionally 8 ft. in length. It 
projects horizontally forwards from the head in the form of a 
cylindrical or slightly tapering, pointed tusk, composed of ivory, 
with a central cavity reaching almost to the apex, without 
enamel, and with the surface marked by spiral grooves and 
ridges, running in a sinistral direction. Occasionally both left 
and right tusks are developed, in which case the direction of the 
grooves is the same in both. No instance has ever been met 
with of the complete development of the right tusk associated 
with a rudimentary condition of the left. In young animals 
several small additional teeth are present, but these usually 
disappear soon after birth. 

The head is rather short and rounded; the fore limbs or 
paddles are small and broad compared with those of most 
dolphins; and (as in the beluga) a dorsal fin, found in nearly all 
other members of the group, is wanting. The general colour of 
the surface is dark grey ahove and white below, variously 
marbled and spotted with shades of grey. 

The narwhal is an Arctic whale, frequenting the icy circum- 
polar seas, and rarely seen south of 65 N. lat. Four instances 
have, however, been recorded of its occurrence on the British 
coasts, one on the coast of Norfolk in 1588, one in the Firth of 
Forth in 1648, one near Boston in Lincolnshire in 1800, while 
a fourth entangled itself among rocks in the Sound of Weesdale, 
Shetland, in September 1808. Like most cetaceans it is gregari- 
ous and usually met with in " schools " or* herds of fifteen or 
twenty individuals. Its food appears to be cuttlefishes, small 
fishes and crustaceans. The purpose served by the tusk — or 
" horn " — is not known; and little is known of the habits of 
narwhals. Scoresby describes them as " extremely playful, 
frequently elevating their horns and crossing them with each 
other as in fencing." They have never been known to charge and 
pierce the bottom of ships with their weapons, as the swordfish 
does. The name " sea-unicorn " is sometimes applied to the 
narwhal. The ivory of which the tusk is composed is of very 
good quality, but owing to the central cavity, only fitted for the 
manufacture of objects of small size. The entire tusks are 
sometimes used for decorative purposes, and are of considerable, 
though fluctuating, value. (See Cetacea.) (W. H. F.) 


NASCIMENTO, FRANCISCO MANOEL DE (1734-1819), 
Portuguese poet, better known by the literary name of Filinto 
Elysio, bestowed on him by the Marqueza de Alorna, was the 
reputed son of a Lisbon boat-owner. In his early years he 
acquired a love of national customs and traditions which his 
humanist education never obliterated, while, in addition, he 
learnt to know the whole range of popular literature (litter atur a 
de cordet) — songs, comedies, knightly stories and fairy tales, 
which were then printed in loose sheets (folhas volantes) and sold 
by the blind in the streets of the capital. These circumstances 
explain the richness of his vocabulary, and joined to an ardent 
patriotism they fitted him to become the herald of the literary 
revival known as Romanticism, which was inaugurated by his 
distinguished follower Almeida Garrett. Nascimento began to 
write verses at the age of fourteen. m He was ordained a priest in 
1754, and shortly afterwards became treasurer of the Chagas 
church in Lisbon. He led a retired life, and devoted his time 
to the study of the Latin classics, especially Horace, and to the 
society of literary friends, among whom were numbered some 
cultivated foreign merchants. These men nourished the common 
ambition to restore Camoens, then half forgotten, to his rightful 
place as the king of the Portuguese Parnassus, and they pro- 
claimed the cult of the Quinhentistas, regarding them as the best 
poetical models, while in philosophy they accepted the teaching 
of the French Encyclopaedists. 

Nascimento's first publication was a version of one of 
Metastases operas, and his early work consisted mainly of 
translations. Though of small volume and merit, it sufficed 
to arouse the jealousy of his brother bards. At this time the 
Arcadia was working to restore good taste and purify the 
language of gallicisms, but the members of this society forgot 
the traditions of their own land in their desire to imitate the 
classics. Nascimento and other writers who did not belong 
to the Arcadia, formed themselves into a rival group, which met 
at the Ribeira das Naos, and the two bodies attacked one 
another in rhyme without restraint, until the " war of the poets," 
as it was called, ended with the collapse of the Arcadia. Nasci- 
mento now conceived a strong but platonic affection for D. 
Maria de Almeida, afterwards Condessa da Ribeira, sister of 
the famous poetess the Marqueza de Alorna. This lady sang 
the chansonnettes he wrote for her, and their poetical intercourse 
drew from him some lyrics of profound emotion. This was 
the happiest epoch of his life, but it did not last long. The 
accession of D. Maria I. inaugurated an era of reaction against 
the spirit and reforms of Pombal, and religious- succeeded to 
political intolerance. In June 1778 Nascimento was denounced 
to the Inquisition on the charge of having given vent to heterodox 
opinions and read " the works of modern philosophers who 
follow natural reason." The tribunal held a secret inquiry, and 
without giving him an opportunity of defence issued an order 
for his arrest, which was to take place early in the morning of 
the 14th of July. He had received a warning, and succeeded 
in escaping to the house of a French merchant, Verdier, where 
he lay hid for eleven days, at the end of which his friend the 
Marquez de Marialva put him on board a French ship which 
carried him to Havre. Nascimento took up his residence in 
Paris, and his first years there passed pleasantly enough. Soon, 
however, his circumstances changed for the worse. He received 
the news of the confiscation of his property by the Inquisition; 
and though he strove to support himself by teaching and writing 
he could hardly make both ends meet. In 1792 his admirer 
Antonio de Araujo, afterwards Conde de Barca, then Portuguese 
minister to Holland, offered the poet the hospitality of his house 
at the Hague, but neither the country, the people, nor the 
language were congenial, and when his host went to Paris on a 
diplomatic mission in 1797 Nascimento accompanied him, and 
spent the rest of his life in and near the French capital. He 
retained to the end an intense love of country, which made him 
wish to die in Portugal, and in 1796 a royal decree permitting 
his return there and ordering the restoration of his goods was 
issued, but delays occurred in its execution, and the flight of 
the court to the Brazils as a result of the French invasion finally 
dashed his hopes. Before this the Conde de Barca had obtained 
him a commission from the Portuguese government to translate 
the De Rebus Emanuelis of Osorio; the assistance of some 
-fellow-countrymen in Paris carried him through his last years, 
which were cheered by the friendship of his biographer and 
translator Alexandre Sane and of the Lusophil Ferdinand 
Denis. Lamartine addressed an ode to him; he enjoyed the 
esteem of Chateaubriand; and his admirers at home, who 
imitated him extensively, were called after him Os Filintistas. 
Exile and suffering had enlarged his ideas and given him a sense 
of reality, making his best poems those he wrote between the 
ages of seventy and eighty-five, and when he passed away, it 
was recognized that Portugal had lost her foremost contempo- 
rary poet. 

Garrett declared that Nascimento was worth an academy in 
himself by his knowledge of the language, adding that no poet 
since Camoens had rendered it such valuable services; but his 
truest title to fame is that he brought literature once more into 
touch with the life of the nation. By his life, as by his works, 
Nascimento links the 18th and 19th centuries, the Neo- Classical 
period with Romanticism. Wieland's Oberon and Chateau- 
briand's Martyrs opened a new world to him, and his conios 
or scenes of Portuguese life have a real romantic flavour; they 
are the most natural of his compositions, though his noble 
patriotic odes — those " To Neptune speaking to the Portuguese " 
and " To the liberty and independence of the United States " — 
are the most quoted and admired. On leaving Portugal, he 
abandoned the use of rhyme as cramping freedom of thought 
and expression; nevertheless bis highly polished verses are 
generally robust to hardness and overdone with archaisms. 
His translations from Latin, French and Italian, are accurate 
though harsh, and his renderings of Racine and the Fables of 
Lafontaine entirely lack the simplicity and grace of the originals. 
But Nascimento's blank verse translation of the Martyrs is in 
many ways superior to Chateaubriand's prose. 

Bibliography. — The most useful edition of his collected works 
is that in 22 vols., Lisbon, 1836-1840. See Innocencio da Silva, 
Diccionario bibliographico Portuguez t ii. 4^.6-457 and ix. 332-336; 
also Filinto Elysio e a sua Epoca, by Pereira da Silva (Rio, 1891); 
and Filinto Elysio, by Dr Theophilo Braga (Oporto, 1891). 

(E. PR.) 


NASEBY, a village of Northamptonshire, England, 7 m. 
S.S.W. of Market Harborough, famous as the scene of the battle of 
June 14, 1645, which decided the issue of the first Civil War (see 
Great Rebellion). The army of King Charles I. was less tban 
10,000 strong, while the " New Model " army of the parliament, 
commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax, numbered some 13,000, 
yet it was not without considerable hopes of victory that the 
Royalists drew up for battle, for although Lieutenant- General 
Cromwell had made the New Model cavalry formidable indeed, 
the Royalist foot had become professionalized in several years 
of war, whereas the Parliamentarian foot was newly organized, 
and in part at least but half-trained. Fairfax and Cromwell, 
however, were still more confident, and with better reason. 
The battlefield lies between Naseby and Sibbertoft (3 m. N. 
of Naseby) and is an undulating ridge which, near the centre 
of England, forms the " divide " between the Avon and the 
Welland rivers. Across this ridge the two armies were drawn 
up, the New Model facing north and the king's army south, 
the horse on the flanks and the foot in the centre in- each army. 

At the first shock the Royal foot asserted its superiority over 
the opposing infantry, four out of five regiments in the first 
line were broken, and Skippon, the major-general of the foot, 
was wounded. But Fairfax's regiment held its ground, until 
the second line of infantry advanced and re-established the front. 
Meantime the Royalist right wing of horse, led by Prince Rupert, 
had completely routed the horse of Colonel Ireton which opposed 
them. But the victors as usual indulged in a disorderly pursuit, 
and attempted to overpower the baggage guard of the enemy 
near Naseby village. Their incoherent attack was repulsed, 
and when Rupert, gathering as many of his men as he could, 
returned to the battlefield, the decisive stroke had been delivered 
by Cromwell and the right wing of Parliamentary horse. In 
front of him, in somewhat broken ground, was Sir Marmaduke 
Langdale's cavalry, which the lieutenant-general with his own 
well- trained regiments scattered after a short, fierce encounter. 
Cromwell's " godly " troopers did not scatter in pursuit. A 
few squadrons were ordered to keep the fugitives on the run, and 
with the rest, and such of Ireton's broken troops as he could 
gather, Cromwell attacked the Royalist centre in rear while 
Fairfax and his foot pressed it in front. Gradually the Royalist 
infantry, inferior in numbers, was disintegrated into small groups, 
which surrendered one after the other. But one brigade, called 
the " Bluecoats," held out to the last, and was finally broken 
by a combined charge of Fairfax's regiment of foot, led by 
Cromwell, and the general's personal escort, led by Fairfax 
himself, who captured a colour with his'own hand. The remnant 
of the king's army, re-formed by Rupert, stood inactive and 
irresolute while its infantry was being destroyed and then fled. 
The spoils included 100 standards and colours and the king's 
private papers. But more important than trophies was the 
practical annihilation of the last field army of which the king 
disposed. Half the Royalists were captured, and about 1000 
fell, in the battle and the pursuit which followed it. In addition 
all the artillery and .the muskets (to the number of 8000) and 
ammunition without which the king could scarcely create a new 
army, fell into the hands of the victors. 

NASH, RICHARD (1674-1762), English dandy, better known 
as " Beau Nash," was born at Swansea on the 18th of October 
1674. He was descended from an old family of good position, 
but his father from straitened means had become partner in a 
glass business. Young Nash was educated at Carmarthen 
grammar school and at Jesus College, Oxford. He obtained a 
commission in the army, which, however, he soon exchanged for 
the study of law at the Temple. Here among " wits and men 
of pleasure " he came to be accepted as an authority in regard 
to dress, manners and style. When the members of the Inns of 
Court entertained William III. after his accession, Nash was 
chosen to conduct the pageant at the Middle Temple. This duty 
he performed so much to the satisfaction of the king that he 
was offered knighthood, but he declined the honour, unless 
accompanied by a pension. As the king did not take the hint, 
Nash found it necessary to turn gamester. The pursuit of his 
calling led him in 1705 to Bath, where he had the good fortune 
almost immediately to succeed Captain Webster as master of the 
ceremonies. His qualifications for such a position were unique, 
and under his authority reforms were introduced which rapidly 
secured to Bath a leading position as a fashionable watering-place. 
He drew up a new code of rules for the regulation of balls and 
assemblies, abolished the habit of wearing swords in places 
of public amusement and brought duelling into disrepute, 
induced gentlemen to adopt shoes and stockings in parades and 
assemblies instead of boots, reduced refractory chairmen to 
submission and civility, and introduced a tariff for lodgings. 
Through his exertions a handsome assembly-room was also 
erected, and the streets and public buildings were greatly 
improved. Nash adopted an outward state corresponding to his 
nominal dignity. He wore an immense white hat as a sign of 
office, and a dress adorned with rich embroidery, and drove in 
a chariot with six greys, laced lackeys and French horns. When 
the act of parliament against gambling was passed in 1745, he 
was deprived of an easy though uncertain means of subsistence, 
but the corporation afterwards granted him a pension of six score 
guineas a year, which, with the sale of his snuff-boxes and other 
trinkets, enabled him to support a certain faded splendour 
till his death on the 3rd of February 1762. He was honoured 
with a public funeral at the expense of the town. Notwith- 
standing his vanity and impertinence, the tact, energy and 
superficial cleverness of Nash won him the patronage and notice 
of the great, while the success of his ceremonial rule, as shown 
in the increasing prosperity of the town, secured him the gratitude 
of the corporation and the people generally. He was a man of 
strong personality, and considerably more able than Beau 
Brummell, whose prototype he was. 

See Lewis Melville, Bath under Beau Nash (1908), with full list of 
authorities; Oliver Goldsmith, Life of Richard Nash (1762). See 
also Gentleman's Magazine (1762); London Magazine, vol. xxxi.; 
" The Monarch of Bath " in Blackwood's Magazine, vol. xlviii. 


NASHE (or Nash), THOMAS (1567-1601), English poet, 
playwright and pamphleteer, was born at Lowestoft in 1567. 
His father belonged to an old Herefordshire family, and is 
vaguely described as a " minister." Nashe spent nearly seven 
years, 1582 to 1589, at St John's College, Cambridge, taking 
his B.A. degree in 1585-1586. On leaving the university he tried, 
like Greene and Marlowe, to make his living in London by 
literature. It is probable that his first effort was The Anatomic of 
Absurditie (1589) which was perhaps written at Cambridge, 
although he refers to it as a forthcoming publication in his 
preface to Greene's Menapkon (1589). In this preface, addressed 
to the gentlemen students of both universities, he makes boister- 
ous ridicule of the bombast of Thomas Kyd and the English 
hexameters of Richard Stanihurst, but does not forget the praise 
of many good books. Nashe was really a journalist born out of 
due time; he boasts of writing " as fast as his hand could trot "; 
he had a brilliant and picturesque style which, he was careful to 
explain, was entirely original; and in addition to his keen sense 
of the ridiculous he had an abundance of miscellaneous learning. 
As there was no market for his gifts he fared no better than the 
other university wits who were trying to live by letters. But 
he found an opening for his ready wit and keen sarcasm in 
the Martin Marprelate controversy. His share in this war of 
pamphlets cannot now be accurately determined, but he has, 
with more or less probability, been credited with the following: 
A Counter cuffe given to Martin Junior (1589), Martins Months 
Minde (1589), The Reiurntof the renowned Cavalier Pasquill 
and his Meeting with Marforius (1 589), The First Parte of Pasquils 
Apologie (1590), and An Almond for a Parrot (1500). He edited 
an unauthorized edition of Sidney's poems with an enthusiastic 
preface in 1 591, and A Wonderftdl Astrologicall Prognostication, 
in ridicule of the almanac-makers, by " Adam Foule weather," 
which appeared in the same year, has been attributed to him. 
Pierce Penilesse, His Supplication to the Divell, published in 1592, 
shows us his power as a humorous critic of national manners, and 
tells incidentally how hard he found it to live by the pen. It 
seems to Pierce a monstrous thing that brainless drudges wax 
fat while " the seven liberal sciences and a good leg will scarce 
get a scholar bread and cheese." In this pamphlet, too, Nashe 
began his attacks upon the Harveys by assailing Richard, 
who had written contemptuously of his preface to Greene's 
Menapkon. Greene died in September 1592, and Richard's 
brother, Gabriel Harvey, at once attacked his memory in his 
Foure Letters, at the same time adversely criticizing. Pierce 
Penilesse. Nashe replied, both for Greene and for himself, 
in Strange Newes of the intercepting certaine Letters, better known, 
from the running title, as Foure Letters Confuted (1592), in which 
all the Harveys are violently attacked. The autumn of 1592 
Nashe seems to have spent at or near Croydon, where he wrote 
his satirical masque of Summers Last Will and Testament at 
a safe distance from London* and the plague. He afterwards 
lived for some months in the Isle of Wight under the patronage 
of Sir George Carey, the governor. In 1593 he wrote Christs 
Teares over Jerusalem, in the first edition of which he made 
friendly overtures to Gabriel Harvey. These were, however, 
in a second edition, published in the following year, replaced 
by a new attack, and two years later appeared the most violent 
of his tracts against Harvey, Have with you to Sajfron-walden, 
or, Gabriell Harveys Hunt is up (1596). In 1599 the controversy 
was suppressed by the archbishop of Canterbury. After 
Marlowe's death Nashe prepared his friend's unfinished tragedy 
of Dido (1596) for the stage. In the next year he was in trouble 
for a play, now lost,, called The Isle of Dogs, for only part of 
which, however, he seems to have been responsible. The 
" seditious and slanderous matter " contained in this play 
induced the authorities to close for a time the theatre at which 
it had been performed, and the dramatist was put in the Fleet 
prison. Besides his pamphlets and his play- writing, Nashe 
turned his energies to novel-writing. He may be regarded as the 
pioneer in the English novel of adventure. He published in 
1594 The Unfortunate Traveller, Or the Life of Jack Wilton, the 
history of an ingenious page who was present at the siege of 
T6rouenne, and afterwards travelled in Italy with t the earl of 
Surrey. It tells the story of the earl and Fair Geraldine, 
describes a tournament held by Surrey at Florence, and relates 
the adventures of Wilton and his mistress Diamante at Rome 
after the earl's return to England. The detailed, realistic 
manner in which Nashe relates his improbable fiction resembles 
that of Defoe. His last work is entitled Lenten Stujfe{i 599) 
and is nominally " in praise of the red herring," but really a 
description of Yarmouth, to which place he had retired after 
his imprisonment, written in the best style of a " special corre- 
spondent." Nashe's death is referred to in Thomas Dekker's 
Knight's Conjuring (1607), a kind of sequel to Pierce Penilesse. 
He is there represented as joining his boon companions in the 
Elysian fields " still haunted with the sharp and satirical spirit 
that followed him here upon earth." Had his patrons under- 
stood their duty, he would not, he said, have shortened his days 
by keeping company with pickled herrings. It may therefore 
be reasonably supposed that he died from eating bad and in- 
sufficient food. The date of his death is fixed by an elegy on him 
printed in Fitzgefirey's Affaniae (1601). 

The works of Thomas Nashe were edited by Dr A. B. Grosart in 
1883-1885, and more recently by Ronald B. McKerrow (1904)- 
An account of his work as a novelist may be found in the English 
Novel in the Time of Shakespeare, by J. J. Jusserand (Eng. trans., 
1890). The Unfortunate Traveller was edited with an introduction 
by Edmund Gosse in 1892. See also " Nash's Unfortunate Traveller 
und Head's English Rogue, die beiden Hauptvertreter des englischen 
Schelmenromans," by W. Kollmann in Anglia (Halle, vol. xxii., 1899, 
pp. 81-140). 


NASHUA, a city and one of the county seats of Hillsboro 
county, New Hampshire, U.S.A., at the confluence of the Nashua 
and Merrimac rivers, 35 m. S.S.E. of Concord and 40 m. N.W. of 
Boston by rail. Pop. (1890) 19,311; (190°) 2 3> 8 9 8 > of whom 
8093 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 26,005. Nashua is 
served by the Boston & Maine railroad, whose several divisions 
centring here give the city commercial importance, and by 
electric lines to Hudson, Litchfield, Pelham, Dracut and 
Tyngsboro. The area of the city in 1906 was 30*71 sq. m. To the 
N.,W. and S.W. of the city there are beautiful hills and moun- 
tains. The church of Saint Francis Xavier and the First Con- 
gregational church are architecturally noteworthy. The city has 
a soldiers' monument, a public library, a court house and two 
hospitals. There is a United States fish hatchery here, and until 
after the close of the 18th century fishing was the principal 
industry of the place, as manufacturing is now. Water-power is 
furnished by the Nashua river and by Salmon Brook, and the 
city is extensively engaged in, manufactures, notably cotton goods, 
boots, shoes, and foundry and machine-shop products. The 
value of the city's factory products increased from $16,096,064 
in 1900 to $12,858,382 in 1905, or 27*4%, and in 1905 Nashua 
ranked second among the manufacturing cities of the state. 
Nashua is one of the oldest interior settlements of the state. The 
first settlement here was established about 1665; and in 1673 the 
township of Dunstable was incorporated by the General Court 
of Massachusetts. In 1741, when the boundary between Massa- 
chusetts and New Hampshire was settled, the jurisdiction of this 
portion of Dunstable was transferred to New Hampshire; five 
years later it was incorporated under the laws of that state; and 
in 1803 the settlement, originally known as Indian Head, was 
incorporated as a village under the name of Nashua, and in 1836 
the township of Dunstable also received the name Nashua. The 
town of Nashville was set apart from the town of Nashua in 1842, 
but the two towns were united under a city charter obtained in 
1853. In 1795 the first stage coach was run through here from 
Boston to Amherst, and at about the same time a canal was 
built around Pawtucket Falls on the Merrimac at Lowell. In 
1822 a manufacturing company was formed, which at once began 
to develop the water-power and in 1825 erected the first cotton 
mill. Thirteen years later the Nashua & Lowell railroad (now 
leased to the Boston & Maine) first reached Nashua. 

See The History of the City of Nashua, edited by E. E. Parker 
(Nashua, 1897). 


NASHVILLE, the capital of Tennessee, U.S.A., and the 
county-seat of Davidson county, on the Cumberland river, 186 m. 
• S.S.W. of Louisville, Kentucky. Pop. (1890) 76,168; (1900) 
80,865, °f whom 3037 were foreign-born and 30,044 were negroes; 
(1910 census) 110,364. Nashville is served by the Tennessee 
Central, the Louisville & Nashville, and the Nashville, Chat- 
tanooga & St Louis railways, and by several steamboat lines. 
The Cumberland river is crossed here by four foot-bridges. 
Nashville is situated on and between hills and bluffs in an un- 
dulating valley; its streets are paved with brick or granite 
blocks in the business section and macadamized or paved with 
asphalt in the residential sections. The city has fine public 
buildings, many handsome residences, and several beautiful 
parks. The principal building is the State House, a fine example 
of pure Greek architecture, on the most prominent hill-top, with 
a tower 205 ft. in height. On the grounds about it are a bronze 
equestrian statue of Andrew Jackson, by Clark Mills (181 5-1883), 
and the tomb of President James K. Polk, who lived in Nashville. 
Other prominent buildings and institutions are the United 
States Government Building, the County Court House, the City 
Hall, the Tennessee School for the Blind, the Tennessee Industrial 
School, the State Library, the Library of the State Historical 
Society housed in Watkins Institute, a Carnegie library, park 
buildings, the State Penitentiary, Vend6me Theatre, the Board 
of Trade Building, the City Hospital, the St Thomas Hospital 
(Roman Catholic), and, near the city, a Confederate Soldiers* 
Home and a State Hospital for the Insane. Eleven miles east of 
the city is the " Hermitage," which was the residence of President 
Andrew Jackson. 

The grounds of the Tennessee Centennial Exposition of 1897 
(commemorating the admission of Tennessee into the Union) on 
the west border of the city now constitute Centennial Park, in 
which still stand the reproduced Parthenon of Athens, the 
History Building, which in general outline is a reproduction of 
the Erectheum and contains a museum and an art gallery, and a 
monument to the memory of James Robertson (1742-1814), the 
founder of the city. Besides this there are four other parks: Glen- 
dale Park in the south section, a place of much natural beauty; 
Shelby Park, in the eastern part of the city, fronting the river; 
Watkins Park, on the north; and Cumberland Driving Park. 
In Mount Olivet Cemetery is a beautiful Confederate Soldiers' 
monument surrounded by the graves of 2000 Confederate soldiers, 
and a little to the north of the city is a National Cemetery in 
which 16,643 Federal soldiers are buried, the names of 471 1 of 
them being unknown. 

Nashville is one of the foremost educational centres in the 
Southern states. In the western part of the city is Vanderbilt 
University. This institution, opened in 1875, is under the 
patronage of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, and was 
named in honour of Cornelius Vanderbilt, who contributed 
$ 1, 000,000 to its funds, and whose son, W. H. Vanderbilt, and 
grandsons, W. K. Vanderbilt and Cornelius Vanderbilt, gave to 
the university about $820,000. It is coeducational and embraces 
an academic department, a biblical department, and departments 
of engineering, law, medicine, pharmacy and dentistry; in 1909 
it had 125 instructors and 959 students. The University of 
Nashville is a non-sectarian institution embracing a college 
department, a medical department, a preparatory department, 
and the George Peabody College for Teachers; it was incorporated 
under the laws of North Carolina as Davidson Academy in 1785 
and under the laws of Tennessee as Cumberland College in 1806, 
and the present name was adopted in 1 826. The George Peabody 
College for Teachers, an important part of the institution, was 
opened as a normal school in 1875; in 1907-1908 it had an 
enrolment (including the summer session) of 647 students. In 
1909 it received $1,000,000 from the Peabody Fund, later supple- 
mented by $250,000 from the state, $200,000 from the city and 
$100,000 from Davidson county. The University of Tennessee, 
located mainly at Knoxvillc, has at Nashville its medical and 
dental departments. Ward Seminary, opened in 1865, Boscobel 
College, opened in 1889, and Buford, Belmont and Radnor colleges 
are all non-sectarian institutions of Nashville for the higher educa- 
tion of women. For the education of negroes the city has Fisk 
University (opened in 1866, incorporated in 1867), under the 
auspices of the American Missionary Association and the Western 
Freedman's Aid Commission of the Congregational Church (noted 
since 1871 for its Jubilee Singers,who raised moneyfor Jubilee Hall, 
finished in 1876) ; it embraces a college department, a preparatory 
department, a normal department and departments of theology, 
music and physical training; and Walden University, founded as 
Central Tennessee College in 1866, under the auspices of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church, and embracing a college depart- 
ment, a normal department, an industrial department, and 
departments of English, commerce, law, medicine, dentistry, 
pharmacy, music, bible training, nurse training and domestic 
science. The Baptist, the Methodist Episcopal (South), the 
Cumberland Presbyterian, and the African Baptist and the 
African Methodist Episcopal churches have publishing houses 
in Nashville. 

The leading manufactures of the city are flour and grist mill 
products (valued at $4,242,491 in 1905), lumber and timber 
products — Nashville is one of the greatest hard wood markets in 
the United States, and in 1005 the value of lumber and timber 
products was $1,1 19,162 and of planing-mill products, $1,299,066 
— construction and repair of steam railway cars ($1,724,007 in 
1 90s) j tobacco ($1,3 1 1,019 in 1905), fertilizers ($846,5 n in 1905), 
men's clothing ($720,227 in 1905), saddlery, harness, soap and 
candles. The total value of the products of the factories increased 
from $15,301,096 in 1900 to $23,109,601 (16-8% of the entire 
factory product of the state) in 1905, amounts greater than 
those of any other city in the state. Nashville has a large trade 
in grain, cotton, groceries, dry goods, drugs, and boots and shoes. 
The water-works and the electric lighting plant are owned and 
operated by the municipality. 

Nashville was founded in 1780 as " the advance guard of 
western civilization " by a company of two hundred or more 
pioneers under the leadership of James Robertson, the nearest 
settlement being at the time about three hundred miles distant. 
When first settled it was named Nashborough in honour of Abner 
Nash (17 16-1786), who was at the time governor of North Caro- 
lina, or more probably in honour of the Revolutionary general, 
Francis Nash (1720-177 7), a brother of Abner, killed at German- 
town; but when, in 1784, it was incorporated as a town by the 
North Carolina legislature the present name was substituted. 
In 1806 Nashville was chartered as a city. Although it was not 
made the capital of the state until 1843, the legislature met here 
from 1812 with the exception of the period from 1815 to 1826. 
Many of the pioneers of Nashville were slain by the Creek and 
Cherokee Indians, and at times the settlement was saved from 
destruction only by the heroism of Robertson, but in 1794 the 
savages were dealt a crushing blow at Nickojack on the lower 
Tennessee and much more peaceful relations were established. 
On the 3rd of June 1850 a convention, known as the Southern or 
Nashville Convention, whose action was generally considered 
a threat of disunion, met here to consider the questions at issue 
between the North and the South. Since such a meeting had 
first been proposed by a state convention of Mississippi, the 
famous Compromise Measures of 1850 had been introduced in 
Congress and the support of the movement had been greatly 
weakened thereby except in South Carolina and Mississippi. 
Nine states, however, were represented by about 100 delegates, 
mostly Democrats, and the convention denounced the Wilmot 
Proviso, and, as " an extreme concession on the part of the 
South," promised to agree that, W. of Missouri, there should be 
slavery only in the territory S. of 36 30' N. lat. At an adjourned 
meeting in November it expressed its dissatisfaction with the 
Compromise Measures of Congress, and asserted the right of the 
South to secede. 

During the Civil War Nashville was at first held by the Con- 
federates, but early in 1862 it was occupied by the Federals, 
who retained possession of it to the end. The battle of Nashville 
was fought on the 15th and 16th of December 1864 between 
the Union army under Major-General G. H. Thomas and the 
Confederates under Geneial J. B. Hood. The Union defences 
extended in a semicircle round Nashville, the flanks on the 
river above and below. Hood's army was to the south-east, 
lightly entrenched, with its flanks on two creeks which empty 
into the Cumberland above and below Nashville. This position 
he desired to maintain as long as possible so as to gather recruits 
and supplies in safety. If Thomas, whose army was of motley 
composition, attacked, he hoped to defeat him and to enter 
Nashville on his heels. Thomas, however, would not strike 
until he had his army organized. Then, on the 15th, he emerged 
from the entrenchments and by a vigorous attack on the Con- 
federate left forced back Hood's line to a second position i£ m. 
to the south. Hood, having detached a part of his army, desired 
to gain time to bring in his detachments by holding this line for 
another day. Thomas, however, gave him no respite. On the 
1 6th the Union army deployed in front of him, again over-lap- 
ping his left flank, and although a frontal attack was repulsed, 
the extension of the Federal right wing compelled Hood to 
extend his own lines more and more. Then the Federals broke 
the attenuated line of defence at its left centre, and Hood's 
army drifted away in disorder. The pursuit was vigorous, 
and only a remnant of the Confederate forces reassembled at 
Columbia, 40 m. to the south, whence they fell back without 
delay behind the Tennessee. 


NASI, JOSEPH (16th century), Jewish statesman and financier, 
was born in Portugal of a Jewish (Marano) family. Emigrating 
from his native land, he founded a banking house in Antwerp. 
Despite his financial and social prosperity there, he felt it irk- 
some to be compelled to wear the guise of Catholicism, and 
determined to settle in a Mahommedan land. After two troubled 
years in Venice, Nasi betook himself to Constantinople. Here 
he proclaimed his Judaism, and married his beautiful cousin 
Reyna. He rapidly rose to favour, the sultans Suleiman and 
Selim promoting him to high office. He founded a Jewish colony 
at Tiberias which was to be an asylum for the Jews of the Roman 
Campagna. In 1566 when Selim ascended the throne, Nasi was 
made duke of Naxos. He had deserved well of Turkey, for he 
had conquered Cyprus for the sultan. Nasi's influence was so 
great that foreign powers often negotiated through him for 
concessions which they sought from the sultan. Thus the 
emperor of Germany, Maximilian II., entered into direct corre- 
spondence with Nasi; William of Orange, Sigismund August II., 
king of Poland, also conferred with him on political questions 
of moment. On the death of Selim in r$74, Nasi receded from 
his political position, but retained his wealth and offices, and 
passed the five years of life remaining to him in honoured 
tranquillity at Belvedere (Constantinople). He died in 1579. 
His career was not productive of direct results, but it was of 
great moral importance. It was one of the tokens of the new 
era that was to dawn for the Jews as trusted public officials 
and as members of the state. 

See Graetz, History of the Jews (Eng. trans.), vol. iv. chs. xvi.- 
xvii.; Jewish Encyclopedia, ix. 172. (I. A.) 


NASIK, a town and district of British India, in the central 
division of Bombay. The town is on the Godavari river, con- 
nected by a tramway (5 m.) with Nasik Road railway station, 
107 m. N.E. of Bombay. Pop. (1901) 21,490. It is a very holy 
place of Hindu pilgrimage, being 30 m. from the source of the 
Godavari. Shrines and temples line the river banks, and some 
stand even in the river. In the vicinity there are a number 
of sacred caves, among which those of Pandu Lena are the most 
noteworthy. They are ancient Buddhist caves dating from the 
3rd century before Christ to the 6th century after. There are 
numerous inscriptions of the highest historical value. Nasik 
has manufactures of cotton goods, brass-ware and mineral 
waters. 

The District of Nasik has an area of 5850 sq. m. With 
the exception of a few villages in the west, the whole district 
is situated on a tableland from 1300 to 2000 ft. above sea-level. 
The western portion is hilly, and intersected by ravines, and 
only the simplest kind of cultivation is possihle. The eastern 
tract is open, fertile and well cultivated. The Sahyadri range 
stretches from north to south; the watershed is formed by the 
Chander range, which runs east and west. All the streams 
to the south of that range are tributaries of the Godavari. To 
the north of the watershed, the Girna and its tributary the Mosam 
flow through fertile valleys into the Tapti. The district generally 
is destitute of trees, and the forests which formerly clothed the 
Sahyadri hills have nearly disappeared; efforts are now being 
made to prevent further destruction, and to reclothe some of 
the slopes. The district contains several old hill forts, the scenes 
of many engagements during the Mahratta wars. Nasik district 
became British territory in 1818 on the overthrow of the peshwa. 
The population in 1901 was 816,504, showing a decrease of 
3 % in the decade. The principal crops are millet, wheat, pulse, 
oil-seeds, cotton and sugar cane. There are also some vineyards 
of old date, and much garden cultivation. Yeola is an important 
centre for weaving silk and cotton goods. There are flour-mills 
at Malegaon, railway workshops at Igatpuri, and cantonments 
at Deolali and Malegaon. At Sharanpur is a Christian village, 
with an orphanage of the C.M.S., founded in 1854. The district 
is crossed by the main line and also by the chord line of the Great 
Indian Peninsula railway. 


NASIR KHOSRAU (Nasiri Khusru), Abu Mu'in-ed-din Nasir b. 
Khosrau (1004-1088), whose nom de plume was Hujjat, the first 
great didactic poet of Persia, was born, according to his own 
statement, a.h. 394 (a.d. 1004), at Kubadiyan, near Balkh in 
Khorasan. The first forty-two years of his life are obscure; 
we learn from incidental remarks of his that he was a Sunnite, 
probably according to the IJanifite rite, well versed in all the 
branches of natural science, in medicine, mathematics, astronomy 
and astrology, in Greek philosophy, and the interpretation of 
the Koran; that he was much addicted to worldly pleasures, 
especially to excessive wine drinking. He had studied Arabic, 
Turkish, Greek, the vernacular languages of India and Sind, 
and perhaps even Hebrew; he had visited Mult an and Lahore, 
and the splendid Ghaznavide court under Sultan Mahmud, 
Firdousl's patron. Later on he chose Merv for his residence, 
and was the owner of a house and garden there. In a.h. 437 
(a.d. 1045) he appears as financial secretary and revenue 
collector of the Seljuk sultan Toghrul Beg, or rather of his brother 
Jaghir Beg, the emir of Khorasan, who had conquered Merv 
in 1037. About this time, inspired by a heavenly voice (which 
he pretends to have heard in a dream), he abjured all the luxuries 
of life, and resolved upon a pilgrimage to the holy shrines of 
Mecca and Medina, hoping to find there the solution of all his 
religious doubts. The graphic description of this journey is 
contained in the Safarnarna, which possesses a special value 
among books of travel, since it contains the* most authentic 
account of the state of the Mussulman world in the middle of 
the nth century. The minute sketches of Jerusalem and its 
environs are even now of practical value. During the seven 
years of his journey (a.d. 1045-105 2) Nasir visited Mecca four 
times, and performed all the rites and observances of a zealous 
pilgrim; but he was far more attracted by Cairo, the capital 
of Egypt, and the residence of the Fatimite sultan Mostansir 
billah, the great champion of the Shf a, and the spiritual as well 
as political head of the house of 'All, which was just then waging 
a deadly war against the 'Abbaside caliph of Bagdad, and the 
great defender of the Sunnite creed, Toghrul Beg the Seljuk. 
At the very time of Nasir's visit to Cairo, the power of the 
Egyptian Fatimites was in its zenith; Syria, the Hejaz, Africa, 
and Sicily obeyed Mostansir's sway, and the utmost order, 
security and prosperity reigned in Egypt. At Cairo he became 
thoroughly imbued with Shf a doctrines, and their introduction 
into his native country was henceforth the sole object of his life. 
The hostility he encountered in the propagation of these new 
religious ideas after his return to Khorasan in 1052 and Sunnite 
fanaticism compelled him at last to flee, and after many wander- 
ings he found a refuge in Yumgan (about 1060) in the mountains 
of Badakshan, where he spent as a hermit the last decades of 
his life, and gathered round him a considerable number of devoted 
adherents, who have handed down his doctrines to succeeding 
generations. 

Most of Nasir's lyrical poems were composed^ in his retirement, 
and their chief topics are^— an enthusiastic praise of 'All, his de- 
scendants, and Mostansir in particular; passionate outcries against 
"Khorasan and its rulers, who had driven him from house and home; 
the highest satisfaction with the quiet solitude of Yumgan; and 
utter despondency again in seeing himself despised by his former 
associates and for ever excluded from participation in the glorious 
contest of life. But scattered through all these alternate outbursts 
of hope and despair we find precious lessons of purest morality, and 
solemn warnings against the tricks and perfidy of the world, the 
vanity of all earthly splendour and greatness, the folly and injustice 
of men, and the hypocrisy, frivolity and viciousness of fashionable 
society and princely courts in particular. It is the same strain 
which runs, although in a somewhat lower key, through his two 
larger mathnawls or double- rhymed poems, the Rushandindma, or 
" book of enlightenment," and the Sa'ddatndma, or " book of feli- 
city." The former is divided into two sections: the first, of a meta- 
physical character, contains a sort of practical cosmography, chiefly 
based on Avicenna's theories, but frequently intermixed both with 
the freer speculations of the well-known philosophical brotherhood 
of Basra, the Ikhwan-es-safa'i,, and purely Shi'ite or Isma'ilite 
ideas; the second, or ethical section of the poem, abounds in moral 
maxims and ingenious thoughts on man's good and bad qualities, 
on the necessity of shunning the company of fools and double-faced 
friends, on the deceptive allurements of the world and the secret 
snares of ambitious craving for rank and wealth. It concludes with 
an imaginary vision of a beautiful world of spirits who have stripped 
off the fetters of earthly cares and sorrows and revel in the pure 
light of divine wisdom and love. If we compare this with a similar 
allegory in Nasir's diwan, which culminates in the praise of Mostansir, 
we are fairly entitled to look upon it as a covert allusion to the 
eminent men who revealed to the poet in Cairo the secrets of the 
Isma'ilitic faith, and showed him what he considered the " heavenly 
ladder " to superior knowledge and spiritual bliss. The passage, thus 
interpreted, lends additional weight to the correctness of Dr Ethe"s 
reconstruction of the date of the Rushandinama, viz. a.h. 440 (a.d. 
1049), which, notwithstanding M. Scheftr's objections, is warranted 
both by the astronomical details and by the metrical requirements 
of the respective verses. That of course does not exclude the possi- 
bility of the bulk of the poem having been composed at an earlier 
period; it only ascribes its completion or perhaps final revision to 
Nasir's sojourn in Egypt. 

A similar series of excellent teachings on practical wisdom and 
the blessings of a virtuous life, only of a severer and more uncom- 
promising character, is contained in the Sa'ddatndma; and, judging 
from the extreme bitterness of tone manifested in the " reproaches 
of kings and emirs," we should be inclined to consider it a protest 
against the vile aspersions poured out upon Nasir's mora! and 
religious attitude during those persecutions which drove him at 
last to Yumgan. Of all the other works of our author mentioned 
by Oriental writers there has as >;et been found only one, the Zdd- 
elmusdjirtn or " travelling provisions of pilgrims " (in the private 
possession of M. Schefer, Paris), a theoretical description of his 
religious and philosophical principles; and we can very well dismiss 
the rest as being probably just as apocryphal as Nasir's famous auto- 
biography (found in several Persian tadhkiras or biographies of 
poets), a mere forgery of the most extravagant description, which is 
mainly responsible for the confusion in names and dates in older 
accounts of our author. 

See Sprenger's Catalogue of the Libraries of the King of Oudh (1854) ; 
H. Ethe\ * Nftsir Chusrau's Rushandindrna" in Zeitschrift der 
deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, xxxiii., xxxiv., 1870-1880; 
E. Fagnan, " Le LivredelafeJiciteV' in vol. xxxiv. of the same journal, 
643-674; Ch. Schefer, Sefer Nameh, publti, .traduit et annoti (Paris, 
1881), and by Guy le Strange in Pilgrims' Text Society (1888); H. 
Ethe*, in Gottinger Nachrichten, 1882, pp. 124-152, Z.D.M.G., 1882, 
pp. 478-508; and Geiger's Grundriss der iranischen Philologie ii. 
p. 278; Fagnan in Journ. As, 7th ser. vol. xiii. pp. 164 seq., and 
Rieu, Cat. Pers. MSS. in Br. Mus., concluded that the poet and the 
pilgrim were different persons. The opposite view was developed by 
Eth6. ■ (H. E.) 


NASIRABAD, or Mymensingh, a town of British India, 
headquarters of Mymensingh district in Eastern Bengal and 
Assam, situated on the left bank of the old channel of the Brahma- 
putra, which is only navigable during the rainy season. Pop. 
(1901) 14,668. It has a station on the branch of the Eastern 
Bengal railway from Dacca to Jagannathganj, on the Jamuna 
or main stream of the Brahmaputra. The earthquake of the 
1 2th of June 1897 destroyed the church and the high school, and 
seriously damaged other public buildings. 

^ Nasirabad is also the name of a town and cantonment in the 
district of Ajmere, Rajputana. Pop. (1901) 22,494. It forms the 
headquarters of a brigade in the 5th division of the Southern army. 


NASMYTH, ALEXANDER (1758-1840), Scottish portrait and 
landscape painter, was born in Edinburgh on the 9th of September 
1758. He studied at the Trustees' Academy under Runciman, 
and, having been apprenticed as an heraldic painter to a coach- 
builder, he, at the age of sixteen, attracted the attention of Allan 
Ramsay, who took the youth with him to London, and employed 
him upon the subordinate portions of his works. Nasmyth 
returned to Edinburgh in 1778, and was soon largely patronized 
as a portrait painter. He also assisted Mr Miller of Dalswinton, 
as draughtsman, in his mechanical researches and experiments; 
and, this gentleman having generously offered the painter a loan 
to enable him to pursue his studies abroad, he left in 1782 for 
Italy, where he remained two years. On his return he painted 
the excellent portrait of Burns, now in the Scottish National 
Gallery, well known through Walker's engraving. Political 
feeling at that time ran high in Edinburgh, and Nasmyth's 
pronounced Liberal opinions, which he was too outspoken and 
sincere to disguise, gave offence to many of his aristocratic 
patrons, and led to the diminution of his practice as a portraitist. 
In his later years, accordingly, he devoted himself mainly to 
landscape work, and did not disdain on occasion to set his hand 
to scene-painting for the theatres. He has been styled, not 
unjustly, the " father of Scottish landscape art." His subjects 
are carefully finished and coloured, but are wanting in boldness 
and freedom. Nasmyth was also largely employed by noblemen 
throughout the country in the improving and beautifying of their 
estates, in which his fine taste rendered him especially skilful; 
and he was known as an architect, having designed the Dean 
Bridge, Edinburgh, and the graceful circular temple covering 
St Bernard's Well. Nasmyth died in his native city on the ioth 
of April 1840. His youngest son, James, was the well-known 
inventor of the steam-hammer. His six daughters all attained 
a certain local reputation as artists, but it was in bis eldest son, 
Patrick (1 787-1 83 1 ), that the artistic skill of his family was most 
powerfully developed. Having studied under his father, Patrick 
went to London at the age of twenty, and soon attracted atten- 
tion as a clever landscapist. He was a diligent student of the 
works of Claude and Richard Wilson, and of Ruysdael and 
Hobbema, upon whom his own practice was mainly founded. 
His most characteristic paintings are of English domestic scenery, 
full of quiet tone and colour, and detailed and minute expression 
of foliage, and with considerable brilliancy of sky effect. They 
were executed with his left hand, his right having in early life 
been injured by an accident. 

For an account of the Nasmyth family see James Nasmyth's 
Autobiography (1883). 


NASMYTH, JAMES (1808-1890), Scottish engineer, was born 
in Edinburgh on the 19th of August 1808, and was the youngest 
son of Alexander Nasmyth, the "father of Scottish landscape 
art." He was sent to school in his native city, and then attended 
classes in chemistry, mathematics and natural philosophy at the 
university. From an early age he showed great fondness for 
mechanical pursuits, and the skill he attained in the practical 
use of tools enabled him to make models of engines, &c, which 
found a ready sale. In' 1829 he obtained a position in Henry 
Maudslay's works in London, where he stayed two years, and 
then, in 1834, started business on his own account in Manchester. 
The beginnings were small, but they quickly developed, and in a 
few years he was at the head of the prosperous Bridgewater 
foundry at Patricroft, from which he was able to retire in 1856 
with a fortune. The invention of the steam-hammer, with which 
his name is associated, was actually made in 1839, a drawing of 
the device appearing in his note-book, or " scheme-book," as he 
called it, with the date 24th November of that year. It was 
designed to meet the difficulty experienced by the builders of 
the Great Britain steamship in finding a firm that would under- 
take to forge the large paddle-wheel shaft required for that 
vessel, but no machine of the kind was constructed till 1842. 
In that year Nasmyth discovered one in Schneiders' Creuzot 
works, and he found that the design was his own and had been 
copied from his " scheme-book." His title, therefore, to be 
called the inventor of the steam-hammer holds good against the 
claims sometimes advanced in favour of the Schneiders, though 
apparently he was anticipated in the idea by James Watt. 
Nasmyth did much for the improvement of machine-tools, and 
his inventive genius devised many new appliances — a planing- 
machine (" Nasmyth steam-arm "), a nut -shaping machine, 
steam pile-driver, hydraulic machinery for various purposes, &c. 
In his retirement he lived at Penshurst in Kent, and amused 
himself with the study of astronomy, and especially of the moon, 
on which he published a work, The Moon considered as a Planet, 
a World and a Satellite, in conjunction with James Carpenter in 
1874. He died in London on the 7th of May 1890. 

	# His Autobiography, edited by Dr Samuel Smiles, was published 
	in 1883. 

NASR-ED-DIN [Nasiru'd-Din] (1829-1896), shah of Persia, 
was born on the 4th of April 1829. His mother, a capable princess 
of the Kajar family, persuaded Shah Mahommed, his father, to 
appoint him heir apparent, in preference to his elder brothers; 
and he was accordingly made governor of Azerbaijan. His 
succession to the throne, 13th October 1848, was vigorously 
disputed, especially by the followers of the reformer El Bab, 
upon whom he wreaked terrible vengeance. In 1855. he re- 
established friendly relations with France, and coming under the 
influence of Russia, signed a treaty of amity on the 17th of 
December with that power, but remained neutral during the 
Crimean war. In 1856 he seized Herat, but a British army under 
Outram landed in the Persian Gulf, defeated his forces and 
compelled him to evacuate the territory. The treaty of peace 
was signed at Paris, on the 4th of March 1857, and to the end of 
his reign he treated Great Britain and Russia with equal friend- 
ship. In 1866 the shah authorized the passage of the telegraph 
to India through his dominions and reminted his currency in the 
European fashion. In 1873, anc * again in 1889, he visited 
England in the course of his three sumptuous journeys to Europe, 
1873,1878,1889. The only results of his contact with Western 
civilization appear to have been the proclamation of religious 
toleration, the institution of a postal service, accession to the 
postal union and the establishment of a bank. He gave the 
monopoly of tobacco to a private company, but was soon com- 
pelled to withdraw it in deference to the resistance of his subjects. 
Abstemious in habits, and devoted to music and poetry, he was 
a cultured, able and well-meaning ruler, and his reign, already 
unusually long for an Eastern potentate, might have lasted still 
longer had it not been for the unpopular sale of the tobacco 
monopoly, which was probably a factor in his assassination at 
Teheran on the 1st of May 1896 by a member of the Babi faction. 
He was succeeded by his son Muzaffar-ed-din. 


NASRIDES, THE, of Granada, were the last of the Mahom- 
medan dynasties in Spain. They ruled from 1232 to 1492. They 
arose at the time when the king of Castile, Fernando the Saint, 
was conquering Andalusia. The dynasty was of remote Arabic 
origin, but its immediate source was the mountain range of the 
Alpujarra, and the founder was Yusuf (or Yahla) l'Nasr, a chief 
who was engaged in perpetual conflict with rival chiefs and in 
particular with the family of Beni-Hud, once kings at Saragossa, 
who held the fortress of Granada. Yusuf's nephew (or son) 
Mahommed completed the defeat of the Beni-Hud largely by the 
help of the king of Castile, to whom he did homage and paid 
tribute. Mahommed I., called el Ghalib, i.e. the Conqueror (r 238- 
1273), served the Christian king against his own co-religionists 
at the siege of Seville and contrived to escape in the general 
wreck of the Mahommedan power. The internal history of the 
dynasty is largely made up of civil dissensions, personal rivalries, 
palace and harem intrigues. The direct male line of Mahommed 
el Ghalib ended with the fourth sultan, Nasr, in 13 14. Nasr was 
succeeded by his cousin Imail (13 14-13 25), who is said to have 
been connected with the original stock only through women. 
From Mahommed el-Ghalib to Mahommed XL, called Boabdil, 
and also the little king " El Rey Cbico " by the Christians, who lost 
Granada in 1492, there are counted twenty-nine reigns of the 
Nasrides, giving an average of nine years. But there was not the 
same number of sultans, for several of them were expelled and 
restored two or three times. Nor did all the members of the 
house who were allowed to have been sultans reign over all the 
territory still in Mahommedan hands. There were .contemporary 
reigns in different parts, and tribal or local rivalries between 
plain and hill, and the chief towns, Granada, Malaga and Guadix. 
The dissensions of the Nasrides reached their greatest pitch of 
fury during the very years in which the Catholic sovereigns were 
conquering their territory piecemeal, 1482-1492. Their position 
imposed a certain consistency of policy on these sultans. They 
submitted and paid tribute to the kings of Castile when they 
could not help doing so, but they endeavoured to use the support 
of Mahommedan rulers of northern Africa whenever it was to be 
obtained. Granada became the recognized place of refuge for 
rebellious subjects of the kings of Castile, and on occasion 
supported them against rebels. The end came when the weakness 
of Mahommedan rulers in Morocco coincided with the rule of 
strong sovereigns in Castile. Frontier wars between Mahom- 
medan and Christian borderers were incessant, and at long 
intervals the kings of Castile made invasions on a considerable 
scale, without, however, following up any successes they might 
gain. The comparative prosperity of Granada was due to the 
concentration of a large population driven from other parts of 
Spain, and the consequent necessity for the intensive cultivation 
of the rich valleys lying among the ranges of mountains which 
encircle the kingdom, and the extensive " Vega " or plain of 
Granada. The reputation for civilization which the agitated 
Mahommedan state enjoys in history is based on the surviving 
parts of the highly decorated fortress palace of the Alhambra, 
which was mainly the work of three of the sultans, the founder, 
Mahommed el Ghalib, and his two successors. 

See S. Lane- Poole, The Mahommedan Dynasties (London, 1894); 
and Historia de Granada, by Don M. Lafuente Alcantara (Granada, 
1884). 


NASSARAWA, a province of the British protectorate of 
northern Nigeria, lying approximately between 6° 40' and 9 E. 
and between 7 40' and 9 40' N. It is situated on the northern 
bank of the river Benue, which in its windings forms the southern 
frontier of the province. Nassarawa is bounded E. by the 
province of Muri, N.E. by Bauchi, N. by Zaria and W. by Nupe 
and the trans-Nigerian portion of the province of Kabba. It 
has an area of 18,000 sq. m. and an estimated population of 
1,500,000. The province, like that of Bauchi, is traversed 
by mountainous regions. It possesses valuable forests and 
many fertile river valleys. Native products include rubber, 
palm kernels and beni seed. Cotton is grown extensively. 

Until the middle of the 18th century Nassarawa appears to have 
been peopled by many native tribes of a primitive type. About 
1750 an important pagan tribe, the Igbira, came from the south- 
west across the Niger and established two rival kingdoms in the 
western portion of the province. Later the native inhabitants 
of Zaria, driven before the Fula, came from the north and 
occupied the central portion of Nassarawa. Later still (about 
1840) certain Fula of Zaria themselves conquered portions of 
the province, founded Keffi, spread as far as the Benue in the 
south-west corner and occupied the town and district of Abuja 
in the west. Fula also made a settlement at the town of 
Nassarawa and at Darroro in the N.E. A colony from Bornu 
entered the province and founded the important town of Lafia 
Berebere in the eastern district. As a result of these movements 
the aboriginal tribes were driven into the hilly regions of the S.E. 
and N.E. The Munshi, a truculent and hardy people, hold a 
portion of the northern bank of the Benue, and the Kagoro and 
Attakar tribes hold the hilly country to the N.E., through 
which the road passes from Keffi and Lafia to the Bauchi high- 
lands. Before the British occupation the state of Nassarawa had 
become a partially subdued Fula emirate, exercising doubtful 
sway over the native pagans and paying a scarcely less doubtful 
allegiance on its own part to the Fula ruler of Zaria. The riverain 
tribes of Nassarawa were among the first to break into open 
aggression against the British administration established at 
Lokoja. In January 1900 they attacked a telegraph construc- 
tion party in the Munshi country on the banks of the Benue. 
The result was the occupation of Keffi by British troops and 
the gradual subjugation of the province. In 1902 the first 
British resident, Captain Moloney, was murdered at Keffi by 
an official of the emir's court. The emir repudiated all re- 
sponsibility for the crime, and the murderer fled to Kano, 
where his reception on friendly terms was among the incidents 
- which determined the Sokoto-Kano campaign of 1903. The 
British were now recognized as the rulers of Nigeria, and the 
emir of Nassarawa threw in his lot with the British government. 
Slave raiding was abolished and the slave trade made illegal. 
A British court of justice was established at the provincial head- 
quarters and native courts in every district. Roads have been 
opened and trade is steadily increasing. In 1905 an expedition 
was required against the Kagoro people, who occupy a vast open 
plateau having an elevation of about 1800 ft. through which a 
short road to the Bauchi tin mines passes from the Benue. 
These people had been raiding the Fula for cattle and murdering 
traders upon the road. A splendid grazing country, healthy 
and also rich in rubber, was opened. The road to the tin mines 
was rendered safe and is now the Bauchi mail route. There is a 
cart road from Loko on the Benue to Keffi. (F. L. L.) 


NASSAU, a territory of Germany, now forming the bulk of the 
government district of Wiesbaden, in the Prussian province of 
Hesse-Nassau, but until 1866 an independent and sovereign duchy 
of Germany. It consists of a compact mass of territory, 1830 
sq. m. in area, bounded on the S. and W. by the Main and Rhine, 
on the N. by Westphalia and on the E. by Hesse. This territory 
is divided into two nearly equal parts by the river Lahn, which 
flows from east to west into the Rhine. The southern half is 
almost entirely occupied by the Taunus Mountains, which 
attain a height of 2900 ft. in the Great Feldberg, while to the 
north of the Lahn is the barren Westerwald, culminating in 
the Salzburgerkopf (2000 ft.). The valleys and low-lying 
districts, especially the Rheingau, are very fertile, producing 
abundance of grain, flax, hemp and fruit; but by far the most 
valuable product of the soil is its wine, which includes several of 
the choicest Rhenish varieties, such as Johannisberger, Marco- 
brunner and Assmannshauser. Nassau is one of the most thickly 
wooded regions in Germany, about 42% of its surface being 
occupied by forests, which yield good timber and harbour large 
quantities of game. The rivers abound in fish, the salmon 
fisheries on the Rhine being especially important. There are 
upwards of a hundred mineral springs in the district, most of 
which formerly belonged to the duke, and afforded him a con- 
siderable part of his revenue. The best known are those of 
Wiesbaden, Ems, Soden, Schwalbach, Schlangenbad, Geilnau 
and Fachingen. The other mineral wealth of Nassau includes 
iron, lead, copper, building stone, coals, slate, a little silver 
and a bed of malachite. Its manufactures, including cotton 
and woollen goods, are unimportant, but a brisk trade is carried 
on by rail and river in wine, timber, grain and fruit. There are 
few places of importance besides the above-named spas; Hochst 
is the only manufacturing town. Wiesbaden, with 100,955 
inhabitants, is the capital of the government district as it 
was of the duchy. In 1864 the duchy contained 468,311 in- 
habitants, of whom 242,000 were Protestants, 215,000 Roman 
Catholics and 7000 Jews. The ecclesiastical jurisdiction was 
in the hands of the Protestant bishop of Wiesbaden and the 
Roman Catholic bishop of Limburg. Education was amply 
provided for in numerous higher and lower schools. The annual 
revenue of the dukedom was about £400,000 and it furnished a 
contingent of 6000 men to the army of the German Confederation. 

History. — During the Roman period the district enclosed by 
the Rhine, the Main and the Lahn was occupied by the Mattiaci 
and later by the Alamanni. The latter were subdued by the 
Franks under Clovis at the end of the 5th century, and at the 
partition of Verdun in 843 the country became part of the East 
Frankish or German kingdom. Christianity seems to have been 
introduced in the 4th century. The founder of the house of 
Nassau is usually regarded as a certain Drutwin (d. 1076), 
who, with his brother Dudo, count of Laurenburg, built a castle 
on a hill overlooking the Lahn, near the present town of Nassau. 
Drutwin's descendant Walram (d. 1198) took the title of count of 
Nassau, and placed his lands under the immediate suzerainty 
of the German king; previously he had been a vassal of the arch- 
bishop of Trier. Then in 1255 Walram's grandsons, Walram 
and Otto, divided between them their paternal inheritance, 
which had been steadily increasing in size. Walram took the 
part of Nassau lying on the left bank of the Lahn and made 
Wiesbaden his residence; Otto took the part on the right bank 
of the river and his capital was Siegen. The brothers thus founded 
the two branches of the house of Nassau, which have flourished 
to the present time. 

The fortunes of the Ottonian, or younger line, belong mainly 
to the history of the Netherlands. The family was soon divided 
into several branches, and in the 1 5th century one of its members, 
Count Engelbert I. (d. 1442), obtained through marriage lands 
in Holland. Of his two sons one took the Dutch, and the other 
the German possessions of the house, but these were united again 
in 1504 under the sway of John, count of Nassau-Dillenburg, 
the head of a branch of the family which, in consequence of a 
series of deaths, the last of which took place in 1561, was a few 
years later the sole representative of the descendants of Count 
Otto. John's son was Count William the Rich (d. 1559), and his 
grandson was the hero, William the Silent, who inherited the 
principality of Orange in 1544 and surrendered his prospective 
inheritance. in Nassau to his brother John (d. 1606). William 
and his descendants were called princes of Orange-Nassau, and 
the line became extinct when the English king William III. 
died in 1702. Meanwhile the descendants of Count John, 
the rulers of Nassau, were flourishing. They were divided into 
several branches, and in 1702 the head of one of these, John 
William Friso of Nassau-Dietz (d. 1711), whose ancestor had been 
made a prince of the Empire in 1654, inherited the title of prince 
of Orange and the lands of the English king in the Netherlands. 
A few years later in 1743 a number of deaths left John William's 
son, William, the sole representative of his family, and as such 
he ruled over the ancestral lands both in Nassau and in the 
Netherlands. In 1806, however, these were taken from a 
succeeding prince, William VI., because he refused to join the 
Confederation of the Rhine. Some of them were given in 181 5 
to the other main line of the family, the one descended from 
Count Walram (see below). In 181 5 William VI. became king 
of the Netherlands as William I., and was compensated for this 
loss by the grant of parts of Luxemburg and the title of grand- 
duke. When in 1890 William's male line died out Luxemburg, 
like Nassau, passed to the descendants of Count Walram. In 
the female line he is now represented by the queen of the 
Netherlands. 

Adolph of Nassau, a son of Walram, the founder of the elder 
line of the house of Nassau, became German king in 1292, but 
was defeated and slain by his rival, Albert of Austria, in 1298. 
The territories of his descendants were partitioned several 
times, but these branch lines did not usually perpetuate them- 
selves beyond a few generations, and Walram's share of Nassau 
was again united in 1605 under Louis II. of Nassau-Weilburg 
(d. 1626). Soon, however, the family was again divided; three 
branches were formed, those of Saarbriicken, Idstein and Weil- 
burg, the heads of the first two becoming princes of the Empire 
in 1688. Other partitions followed, but at the opening of the 
19th century only two lines were flourishing, those of Nassau- 
Usingen and Nassau-Weilburg. In 1801 Charles William, 
prince of Nassau-Usingen, was deprived by France of his lands 
on the left bank of the Rhine, but both he and Frederick William 
of Nassau-Weilburg, who suffered a similar loss, received ample 
compensation. In 1806 both Frederick William and Frederick 
Augustus, the brother and successor of Charles William, joined 
the Confederation of the Rhine and received from Napoleon 
the title of duke, but after the battle of Leipzig they threw in 
their lot with the allies, and in 1815 joined the German Con- 
federation. As a result of the changes of 181 5 Frederick Augustus 
of Nassau-Usingen ceded some of his newly-acquired lands to 
Prussia, receiving in return the greater part of the German 
possessions of the Ottonian branch of the house of Nassau (see 
above). In March 18 16 he died without sons and the whole 
of Nassau was united under the rule of Frederick William of 
Nassau-Weilburg as duke of Nassau. Already in 18 14 Frederick 
William had granted a constitution to his subjects, which pro- 
vided for two representative chambers, and under his son William, 
who succeeded in 1816, the first landtag met in 1818. At once, 
however, it came into collision with the duke about the ducal 
domains, and* these dissensions were not settled until 1836. 
In this year the duchy took an important step in the develop- 
ment of its material prosperity by joining the German Zollverein. 
In 1848 Duke Adolph, the son and successor of Duke William, 
was compelled to yield to the temper of the times and to grant 
a more liberal constitution to Nassau, but in the following years 
a series of reactionary measures reduced matters to their former 
unsatisfactory condition. The duke adhered stedfastly to his 
conservative principles, while his people showed their sympathies 
by electing one liberal landtag after another. In 1866 Adolph 
espoused the cause of Austria, sent his troops into the field and 
asked the landtag for money. This was refused, Adolph was 
soon a fugitive before the Prussian troops, and on the 3rd of 
October 1866 Nassau was formally incorporated with the 
kingdom of Prussia. The deposed duke entered in 1867 into a 
convention with Prussia by which he retained a few castles and 
received an indemnity of about £1,500,000 for renouncing his 
claim to Nassau. In 1890, on the extinction of the collateral line 
of his house, he hecame grand-duke of Luxemburg, and he died 
on the 17th of November 1905. 

The town of Nassau (Lat. Nasonga) on the right bank of the 
Lahn, 15 m. above Coblenz, is interesting as the birthplace of 
the Prussian statesman, Freiherr von Stein. Pop. (1905) 2238. 
It has a Roman Catholic and an Evangelical church, while its 
main industries are brewing and mining. Near the town are 
the ruins of the castle of Stein, first mentioned in 1138, with a 
marble statue of Stein, while the ruins of the ancestral castle 
of the house of Nassau may also be seen. 

For the history of Nassau see Hennes, Gesckickte der Grafen von 
Nassau bis 1255 (Cologne, 1843); von Schiitz, Geschichte des Herzog- 
turns Nassau (Wiesbaden, 1853); von Witzleben, Genealogie und 
Geschichte der Furstenhauses Nassau (Stuttgart, 1855); F. W. T. 
Schliephake and K. Menzel, Geschichte von Nassau (Wiesbaden, 
1 865-1 889); the Codex diplomaticus nassoicus, edited by K. Menzel 
and W. Sauer (1885-1887); and the Annalen des Vereins fur nassau- 
ische Altertumskunde und Geschichtsforschung (1827 fol.). 


NAST, THOMAS (1540-1902), American caricaturist, was born 
on the 27 th of September 1840, in the military barracks of 
Landau, Germany, the son of a musician in the Ninth regiment 
Bavarian band. His mother took him to New York in 1846. 
He studied art there for about a year with Theodore Kaufmann 
and then at the school of the National Academy of Design. 
At the age of fifteen he became a draughtsman for Frank 
Leslie 7 s Illustrated Newspaper; three years afterwards for 
Harper's Weekly. In i860 he went to England for the New 
York Illustrated News to depict the prize-fight between Heenan 
and Sayers, and then joined Garibaldi in Italy as artist for 
The Illustrated London News. His first serious work in caricature 
was the cartoon " Peace " in 1862, directed against those in 
the North who opposed the prosecution of the Civil War. This 
and his other cartoons during the Civil War and Reconstruction 
days were published in Harper's Weekly; they attracted great 
attention, and Nast was called by President Lincoln " our best 
recruiting sergeant." Even more able were Nast's cartoons 
against the Tweed Ring conspiracy in New York city; his 
caricature of Tweed being the means of the latter's identifica- 
tion and arrest at Vigo. In 1873, 1885 and 1887 Nast toured 
the United States as lecturer and sketch-artist, but with the 
advent of new methods and younger blood his vogue decreased. 
He had been an ardent Republican in his earlier years; had 
bitterly attacked President Johnson and his Reconstruction 
policy; had ridiculed Greeley's candidature, and had opposed 
inflation of the currency, notably with his famous " rag-baby " 
cartoons, but his advocacy of civil service reform and his distrust 
of Blaine forced him to become a Mugwump and in 1884 an open 
supporter of the Democratic party, from which in 1892 he re- 
turned to the Republican party and the support of Harrison. 
He had lost practically all of his earnings by the failure of Grant 
and Ward, and in May 1902 was appointed by President Roosevelt 
consul-general at Guayaquil, Ecuador, where he died on the 7th 
of December in the same year. He did some painting in oil 
and some book illustrations, but these were comparatively 
unimportant, and his fame rests on his caricatures and political 
cartoons. Nast introduced the donkey to typify the Democratic 
party, the elephant to typify the Republican party, and the 
tiger to typify Tammany Hall, and introduced into American 
cartoons the practice of modernizing scenes from Shakespeare 
for a political purpose. 

See A. B. Paine, Thomas Nast, his Period and his Pictures (New 
York, 1904). 


NASTURTIUM, or Indian cress, Tropaeolum majus, a 
perennial climber, native of Peru, but in cultivation treated 
as a hardy annual. It climbs by means of the long stalk of the 
peltate leaf which is sensitive to contact like a tendril. The 
irregular flowers have five sepals united at the base, the dorsal 
one produced into a spurred development of the axis; of the 
five petals the two upper are slightly different and stand rather 
apart from the lower three; the eight stamens are unequal and 
tbe pistil consists of three carpels which form a fleshy fruit 
separating into three one-seeded portions. The flowers are 
sometimes eaten in salads, and the leaves and young green fruits 
are pickled in vinegar as a substitute for capers. The pungency 
of the nasturtium officinale, the water-cress, gave it its name 
nasi-tortium, that which twists the nose. The plant should 
have a warm situation, and the soil should be light and well 
enriched; sow thinly early in April, either near a fence or wall, 
or in an open spot, where it will require stakes 6 to 8 ft. high. 

The dwarf form known as Tom Thumb (7\ w. nanum), is an 
excellent bedding or border flower, growing about a foot high. 
Sow in April in the beds or borders; and again in May for a 
succession. Other fine annual Tropaeolums are T. Lobbianum 
with long spurred orange flowers and numerous varieties; and 
r. minus, a kind of miniature T. majus with yellow, scarlet and 
crimson varieties. 

The genus Tropaeolum, native of South America and Mexico, 
includes about 35 species of generally climbing annual and 
perennial herbs with orange, yellow, rarely purple or blue, 
irregular flowers, 7\ peregrinum is the well-known canary 
creeper. The flame nasturtium with brilliant scarlet blossoms 
is r. speciosum from Chile; it has tuberous roots, as have also 
such well-known perennials as 7\ polyphyllum, 7 1 . pentaphyllum. 
Of these T. speciosum should be grown in England in positions 
facing north; it flourishes in Scotland. 


NATAL, a maritime province of the Union of South Africa, 
situated nearly between 27 and 31 S., 29 and 33 E. It is 
bounded S.E. by the Indian Ocean, S.W. by the Cape province 
and Basutoland, N.W. by tbe Orange Free State province, N. 
and N.E. by the Transvaal and Portuguese East Africa. It has a 
coast line of 376 m.; its greatest length N. to S. in a direct line 
is 247 m.; its greatest breadth E. to W., also in a direct line, 
200 m. Natal has an area of 35,371 sq. m., being nearly three- 
quarters the size of England. (For map see South Africa.) 
The province consists of two great " divisions, namely Natal 
proper and Zululand (q.v.) . Natal proper has a seaboard of 1 66 m. 
and an area of 24,910 sq. m., Zululand, in which is included 
Amatongaland, a seaboard of 210 m. and an area of 10,461 sq. m. 
It lies north-east of Natal. In this article the description of the 
physical features, &c. refers only to Natal proper. 

Physical Features. — The terrace formation of the land char- 
acteristic of other coast regions of South Africa prevails in Natal. 
The country may be likened to a steep and gigantic staircase 
leading to a broad and level land lying beyond its borders. 
The rocky barrier which shuts off this land is part of the Drakens- 
berg range. From the mountain sides flow many rivers which 
dash in magnificent waterfalls and through deep gorges to the 
. sea. Falling 8000 or more feet in little over 200 m., these streams 
are unnavigable. The south-eastern sides of the mountains are 
in part covered with heavy timber, while the semi-tropical 
luxuriance of the coast belt has earned for Natal tbe title of 
" the garden colony." 

The coast trends, in an almost unbroken line, from S.W.to N.E. 
It extends from the mouth of the Uintamvuna river (31 4' S., 
30 12' E.), which separates Natal from the Cape, to the mouth .of 
the Tugela (29 15' S., 31 30' E.), which marks the frontier 
between Natal and Zululand. The only considerable indentation 
is at Durban, about two-thirds of the distance from the Umtam- 
vuna to the Tugela, where there is a wide and shallow bay, 
• covering with its islands nearly 8 sq. m. The coast, though low 
and sandy in places, is for the most part rocky and dangerous. 
The warm Mozambique current sweeps down from the N.E., 
setting up a back drift close in shore. The southern entrance 
to Durban harbour is marked by a bold bluff, the Bluff of Natal, 
which is 250 ft. high and forested to the water's edge. Opposite 
the Bluff a low sandy spit called the Point forms the northern 
entrance to the harbour. North of Durban the coast belt, 
hitherto very narrow, widens out and becomes more flat. But 
the greater part of the coast region, which has an average depth 
of 15 m., is broken and rugged. Ranges of hills lead to the first 
plateau, which has an average elevation of 2000 ft. and is of 
ill-defined extent. Here the land loses its semi-tropical character 
and resembles more the plains of the Orange Free State and the ' 
Transvaal. The second plateau, reached by a steep ascent, 
has an elevation of from nearly 4000 to fully 5000 St. It is an 
undulating plain, grass-covered, but for the most part without 
trees or bush. It continues to the foot of the Drakensberg range, 
the mountains rising towards the S.W., with almost perpendicular 
sides, 6000 to 7000 ft. above the country at their base. North- 
west, towards the Transvaal, the mountains are of lower elevation 
and more rounded contours. 

Mountains. — Although the division of the country into terraces 
separated by ranges of hills is clearly marked in various districts, 
as for instance between Durban and Colenso, the province is traversed 
by many secondary chains, as well as by spurs of the Drakensberg. 
The highest points of that range, and the highest land in Africa south 
of Kilimanjaro, lie within the borders of Natal. The Drakensberg 
(q.v.), from Majuba Hill on the N.W. to Bushman's Nek in the S.W., 
form the frontier of the province, the crest of the range being gener- 
ally within Natal. This is the case in the Mont-aux-Sources (11,170 
ft.) and Cathkin Peak or Champagne Castle (10,357 ft.); the top of 
the third great height, Giant's Castle (9657 ft.), is in Basutoland, but 
its seaward slopes are in Natal. From Giant's Castle to Mont-aux- 
Sources, in which, forsaking their general direction, the Drakensberg 
run S.E. to N.W., the mountains attain an elevation of 10,000 to 
1 1,000 ft., with few breaks in their face. North of Mont-aux-Sources 
the mountain ridge sinks to 8000 and less feet, and here are several 
passes leading into the Orange Free State. Laing's Nek is a pass 
into the Transvaal. The chief heights in Natal between Mont-aux- 
Sources and Laing's Nek are Tintwa (7500 ft.), Inkwelo (6808 ft.) 
and the flat-topped Majuba (7000 ft.). Spurs from the Drakensberg, 
at right angles to the main range, cross the plateaus. The most 
northern, which runs E. from Majuba to the Lebombo Mountains, 
coincides roughly with the northern frontier of Natal. It is one of 
the transverse chains connecting the eastern coast range with the 
higher terraces and goes under a variety of names, such as Elands 
Berg and Ingome Mountains. A second range, the Biggarsberg, 
starts from the Drakensberg near Mount Malani and goes E.S.E. 
tothe junction of Mooi, Buffalo and Tugela rivers. This range con- 
tains, in Indumeni (7200 ft.), the highest mountain in Natal outside 
the main Drakensberg. A third range runs N.E. from Giant's Castle 
towards the Biggarsberg. It lies north of the Mooi river, and its 
most general name is Mooi River Heights. A fourth range also 
diverges from Giant's Castle and ramifies in various branches over 
a large tract of country, one branch running by Pietermaritzburg 
to the Berea hills overlooking Durban. The chief height in this 
fourth range is Spion Kop (7037 ft.), about 25 m. S.E. of Giant's 
Castle. This is not the Spion Kop rendered famous during the 
Anglo- Boer War of 1899-1902. That Spion Kop, with Vaal Kranz 
and Pieter's Hills, arc heights on the northern bank of the upper 
Tugela. 

Secondary ranges with heights of 5000 and more feet are numerous, 
whilst lofty isolated mountains rise from the plateaus. The greatest 
of these isolated masses is Mahwaqa (6834 ft.), in the south-west 
part of the country. Of many flat-topped hills the best known is the 
Table Mountain east of Pietermaritzburg. 

Rivers. — All the rivers of Natal not purely coast streams have 
their origin in the Drakensberg or its secondary ranges. The largest 
and longest, the Tugela, with the Buffalo, Mooi, Klip and other 
tri butanes is treated separately. The Tugela basin drains the 
whole country north of a line drawn in a direct line east from Giant's 
Castle. The Umkomaas (" gatherer of waters ") rises in Giant's 
Castle and flows in a south-easterly course to the sea. Though it 
makes no large sweeps it has so tortuous a course that its length 
(some 200 ml) is twice that of the valley through which it flows. 
Its banks in its upper course are wild and picturesque, with occasional 
wide deep vallevs, with climate and vegetation resembling the coast 
belt. The Umzimkulu river rises in Bamboo Castle, in the Drakens- 
berg, and, with bolder curves than the Umkomaas, runs in a course 
generally parallel with that stream S.E. to the sea, its mouth being 
about 40 m. south of that of the Umkomaas. The Ingwangwane 
rises in the Drakensberg south of the Umzimkulu, which it joins 
after a course of some 50 m. Below the junction the Umzimkulu 
forms for some distance the frontier between Natal and the Griqua- 
land East division of the Cape. The scenery along the river valley 
(120 m. long) is very striking, in turns rugged and desolate, verdant 
and smiling, with patches of dense forest and heights wooded to 
their summit. Port Shepstone is situated at the mouth of the river, 
which, like that of all others in Natal, is obstructed by a bar. As a 
result of harbour works, however, a channel has been cleared and 
steamers can ascend the river for 6 m. 

The Pongola rises in the Transvaal in high ground N.E. of Wakker- 
stroom and flows E., forming, for the greater part of its course, the 
northern frontier of the province. After piercing the Lebombo 
Mountains, it turns N. and joins the Maputa, a river emptying into 
Delagoa Bay. The Umgeni, which rises in the Spion Kop hills some 
30 m. S.E. of Giant's Castle, passes through the central part of Natal 
and reaches the sea 4 m. N. of Durban. It flows alternately through 
mountainous and pastoral country, and is known for two magnificent 
waterfalls, both within 12 m. of Pietermaritzburg. The upper fall 
is close to the village of Howick. Here the Umgeni leaps in a single 
sheet of water down a precipice over 350 ft. high, pore than double 
the height of Niagara, forming, when the river is swollen by the 
rains, a spectacle of rare magnificence. Some 12 m. below are the 
Karkloof or Lower Falls, where in a series of beautiful cascades 
the water descends to the plain. Other rivers of Natal which rise 
in the spurs of the Drakensberg or in the higher terraces are the 
Umvoti, which runs south of the Tugela and gives its name to a 
county division, the Umlaas (which gives Durban its main water 
supply, the lllovo, which traverse the country between the 
Umgeni and Umkomaas, and the Umtamvuna, noteworthy as 
forming the boundary between Natal and Pondoland. There are 
also seventeen distinct coast streams in the colony. 

[Geology.* — The general geological structure of Natal and Zululand 
is simple. It consists of a series of plateaus formed of sedimentary 
rocks which mainly belong to three formations of widely separated 
ages, and which rest on a platform of granitic and metamorphic 
rocks. 

The geological formations represented include : — 

	Post-Cretaceous 
	and Recent 
	Cretaceous . 
	U. Karroo . 
	L. Karroo . 
	Cape System 
	Pre-Cape Rocks 
	Littoral of Zululand. 
	'Plateau Basalts. 
	Cave Sandstone. 
	Red Beds. 
	Stormberg Series. 
	BeaufortSeries. 
	Ecca Series. 
	Ecca Glacial Series (Dwyka Conglomerate). 
	Table Mountain Sandstone Series. 
	Quartzites, Conglomerates and Shales of 
	Nkandhla, Umfolosi river. 
	Gneisses, Schists, Marbles, Granites (Swazi- 
	{ land Series). 

Pre-Cape Rocks. — The granites and schists occur in close associa- 
tion. The series covers considerable areas in the lowest parts of the 
valleys and near the coast. The widest areas are in Zululand. In the 
Umzimkulu river and in the Tugela river below its junction with the 
Buffalo, metamorphic limestones are associated with schists, gneisses 
and granites. A group of highly inclined quartzites, altered con- 
glomerates and vasperoid rocks which crop out on the Umhlatuzi 
river, between Melmoth and Nkandhla and on the White Umfolosi 
river above Ulundi Plains, is considered by Anderson to represent 
some portion of the Lo^er Witwatersrand series. The conglomerates 
are true " banket " and are auriferous, but the gold has not been 
met with in payable quantities. 

Table Mountain Sandstone Series. — This rests unconformably 
on the pre-Cape rocks. Traced northwards, the series becomes 
thinner and finally dies out. As a rule denudation, which has acted 
on a magnificent scale, has removed all but a few hundred feet of 
the basement beds. The maximum thickness of 2000 ft. occurs near 
Melmoth. The beds are usually thin false-bedded sandstones with 
an almost complete absence of shales. A conglomerate at the base 
contains traces of gold. Griesbach mentions the occurrence of some 
small bivalves in the shales of Greytown, but Anderson failed to 
find any fossils. 

Ecca Glacial Series. — A great unconformity separates the Table 
Mountain and Ecca series. In the Cape this gap is represented by 
the Witteberg and Bokkeveld series. The Dwyka conglomerate 
rarely attains any great thickness though forming wide outcrops. 
It is usually a hard compact rock containing striated stones. The 
Umgeni quarries, where the rock is used for road-metal, furnish the 
best exposures. 

Ecca Series. — With the Beaufort series this occupies over two- 
thirds of the western portion of the province and has wide outcrops 
in Zululand and in the Vryheid districts. The Ecca shales contain 
some of the best coals of South Africa, but the seams contain much 
unmarketable coal. Around Dundee and Newcastle the coals are 
bituminous. In Zululand they are chiefly anthracitic. The fossils 
include several species of Glossopteris among them: Glossopteris 

	1 See C. L. Griesbach, " On the Geology of Natal in South Africa," 
	Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. vol. xxvii. pp. 53-72 (1871); P. C. Suther- 
	land, " Notes on an Ancient Boulder Clay of Natal," Quart. Journ. 
	Geol. Soc. vol. xxvi. pp. 514-517 (1870); W. Anderson, Reports, 
	Geol Survey, Natal and Zululand (Pietermaritzburg, 1901 ; London, 
	1904); and " Science in South Africa," Handbook, Brit. Assoc, pp. 
	260-272 (Cape Town, 1905). 

browniana var indica; Bunb. Phyllotkeca Zeilleri eth. fil.; Estkeria 
Greyii, Jones, indicating a Permo-Carboniferous age. 

Beaufort Series. — The Ecca series graduates upwards into the 
highly coloured sandstones and shales of the Beaufort series. Fossil 
reptilian remains, chiefly Dicynodon, are abundant. 

Stormberg Series. — This consists of sandstones and shales with thin 
seams of coal. The chief outcrops occur around Biggarsberg and 
along the upper slopes of the Drakensberg. The fossil flora — Thinn- 
feldia odoniopter aides, Morr. and a Pterophyllum — indicate a Rhaetic 
age. No reptilian remains have been found. 

Upper Karroo. — The Red beds and Cave sandstones occur along 
the eastern flanks of the Drakensberg. 

Cretaceous. — Deposits of this age^ are confined to the littoral. 
They are exceedingly prolific in fossils which prove them to be of 
Upper Cretaceous age. A long list of fossils has been obtained from 
Umkivelane Hill, Zululand. W.G.*] 

Climate. — With a rise in level (not reckoning the mountain tops) 
of 5500 ft. in a distance of 170 m., Natal possesses several varieties 
of climate but is nowhere unhealthy. The climate is comparable 
to that of north Italy. The valleys and coast belt, though practically 
free from malarial fever, are hot and humid, and fires in dwelling 
houses are seldom required even in the coolest months; the lower 
plateaus are cool and the air dry; the uplands are bracing and 
often very cold, with snow on the ground in winter. The year is 
divided into two seasons, summer, which begins in October and ends 
in March, and winter, which fills up the rest of the year. Summer 
is the rainy season, and May, June and July the driest months of 
the year. Ttoe mean temperature at Durban, records taken at 26a 
ft. above the sea, is 70 F., varying from £2° in winter to 98 in 
summer. The average summer humidity is 76%, that of winter 
74 %. At Pietermaritzburg, 41 m. inland and 2200 ft. above the sea, 
the temperature is about 64 . In the uplands the heat of summer is 
often greater than on the coast, but the air is less humid and the 
nights are generally cool. Both the humidity and the temperature 
are increased by the great mass of water, the Mozambique current, 
flowing south from the equatorial regions. At Durban the annual 
rainfall is about 40 in., at Pietermaritzburg 38. The average for the 
province is believed to be about 30 in. In 1893, the year of highest 
recorded rainfall, 70 in. fell on the coast districts. Thunderstorms, 
averaging nearly one hundred in the year, and violent hailstorms, 
occur in summer, being most severe in the interior. The storms 
serve to modify the intense heat, though the lightning and hail 
cause considerable damage. The prevailing winds on the coast are 
north-east, warm and humid, and south-west, cool and bracing, 
though in summer the south-west wind brings rain. Inland, chiefly 
in early summer, a hot dry wind, often accompanied by a dust 
storm, blows from the north. These winds, which blow on an 
average twenty-five days in the year, seldom reach the coast and are 
generally followed by rain. Inhabitants of Natal are practically 
exempt from chest diseases. 

Flora. — Botanically, Natal is divided into three zones: (1) the 
coast belt, extending from the sea inland to heights of 1500 ft., 
and in some cases to 1800 and 2000 ft.; (2) the midland region, 
which rises to 4000 ft.; (3) the upper regions. In these zones the 
flora varies from sub-tropical to sub-alpine. The heaths and pro- 
teads common at the Cape peninsula, in Basutoland and other parts 
of South Africa, are rare in Natal, but almost any species of the flora 
of semi-tropical and temperatecountriesintroducedattains perfection. 
The trees and plants characteristic of each zone are not always 
confined to that zone, but in several instances, when common to the 
coast belt and the midlands, their character alters according to the 
elevation of the land. The dense bush or jungle of evergreen trees, 
climbers and flowering shrubs, which up to the middle of the 19th 
century covered the greater part of the coast belt, has largely dis- 
appeared. There are still, however, in the coast belt woods of 
leguminous evergreens bearing bright-coloured flowers. The trees 
in these woods are generally from 20 to 50 ft. in height and include 
the knob-thorn, water-boom, kafir-boom (with brilliant scarlet 
flowers)^ the Cape chestnut and milkwoods (Mimusops). But the 
most striking of the coast-belt flora are the tropical forms — the palm, 
mangrove, wild banana (Strelitzia augusta), tree-ferns, tree euphorbia, 
candelabra spurge and Caput medusae. Of palms there are two 
varieties, the ilala {Hyphaene crinita), found only by the sea shore 
and a mile or two inland, and the isundu {Phoenix reclinata), more 
widespread and found at heights up to 2000 ft. or even higher. 
The amatungulu or Natal plum, found chiefly near the sea, is one of 
the few wild plants with edible fruit. Its leaves are of a glossy dark 
green, its] flower white and star-shaped and its fruit resembles the 
plum. Other wild fruits are the so-called Cape gooseberry (not 
native to Natal) and the kaw apple or Dingaan apricot, which grows 
on a species of ebony tree. 

The midland region is characterized by grass lands (the Natal 
grasses are long and coarse) and by considerable areas of flat-topped 
thorn bush mimosa. The bush is not as a rule dense, nor is it of any 
great height. A tree peculiar to this, zone is the Alberta magna. 
It has dull pink flowers, succeeded by seed vessels, each of which is 
crowned by two scarlet-coloured leafy lobes. A grass belt separates 
the thorn bush from the districts carrying heavy timber, found 
mainly in the upland zone, along the sides of the mountains ex- 
posed to the rains and in kloofs. The indigenous timber trees are 
principally the yellow wood (Podocarpus) , sneezewood (Pteroxylon 
utile), stinkwood {Oreodaphne bullata), black iron wood (plea lauri- 
folia), white ironwood (Vepris lanceolaia), and umtomboti (Exoecaria 
africana) ; all are very useful woods, and the yellow wood, sneeze- 
wood, stinkwood and ironwood when polished have grain and 
colour equal to maple, walnut and ebony. # The " rooibesje," red 
pear and milkwood trees are used for boatbuilding. The Australian 
Eucalyptus and Casuarina in great variety, and many other imported 
trees, including syringas, wattles, acacias, willows, pines, cypress, 
cork and oak all thrive when properly planted and protected from 
grass fires. The black wattle has been extensively planted and 
flourishes at elevations of from 1000 to 3000 ft. Its bark forms a 
valuable article of commerce. 

Flowers which bloom in the early spring are abundant, especially 
on the edges of forests. Among those found throughout the country 
are the Dierama pendula, the orchid and the " everlasting." As a 
rule flowers common to all zones are on the coast smaller and with 
paler colours than they are in the midlands. Aloes are common; 
in part of the midland zone they form when in bloom with abundance 
of orange and scarlet flowers a most picturesque sight. Of Cyca- 
daceae the Stangeria paradoxa is peculiar to Natal. There is but 
one cactus indigenous to Natal; it is found hanging from perpen- 
dicular rocks in the midlands. There are, however, several species of 
euphorbia of the miscalled cacti. Climbing plants with gorgeous 
flowers are common, and there are numerous species of Compositae 
and about a hundred cinchonaceous plants. Bulbous plants are 
also very numerous. The most common are the Natal lily with 
pink and white ribbed bells, the fire-lily, with flame-coloured blos- 
soms, ixias, gladiolas, the Ifafa lily, with fuchsia-like clusters, and 
the arum lily. A conspicuous veld plant is the orange and crimson 
leonotis, growing 6 ft. high. Geraniums are somewhat scarce. Fern 
life is abundant; 126 species are indigenous, two being tree-ferns. 
One of these, Cyathea dregei, found in moist places and open land, 
has a stem 20 ft. high; the stem of the other, Hemitelia capensis, 
sometimes reaches 30 ft. The ferns are most common in the midland 
zone and in the heavy timber forests. Sixty different species have 
been identified in one valley not more than 1 m. long and about 
100 yds. in breadth. Among fruit trees, besides the wild fruits 
already mentioned, are the pineapple, mango, papua, guava, grena- 
dilla, rose apple, custard apple, soursop, loquat, naartje, shaddock 
and citrous fruits. 

Fauna. — The larger animals which abounded in Natal in the first 
half of the 19th century have been exterminated or driven out of the 
country. This fate has overtaken the elephant, giraffe, the buffalo, 
quagga, gnu, blesbok, gemsbok and ostrich. If the Vryheid district 
be excluded, the lion < and rhinoceros may be added to this list; 
and the Vryheid district belongs geographically to Zululand. Hip- 
popotami are still found in the Umgeni river and crocodilesin several 
of the coast streams. Leopards and panthers are found in thickly 
wooded kloofs. Hyenas, jackals, wild pig, polecats and wild dogs 
{Cants pictus) of different species are still found in or about bush 
jungles and forest clumps; elands {Antilope oreas) are preserved on 
some estates, and there are at least ten distinct species of antelope 
(hartebeest, bushbok, duiker, rictbok, rhebok, rovibok, blauwbok, 
&c). In the Vryheid district the kudu, blue wildebeest, waterbuck, 
reedbuck, impala, steinbok and klipspringer are also found. Several 
of these species are now preserved. Ant-eaters (Orycteropus capensis) , 
porcupines, weasels, squirrels, rock rabbits, hares and cane rats are 
common in different localities. Baboons (Cynocephalus porcarius) 
and monkeys of different kinds frequent the mountains and rocky 
kloofs and bush and timber lands. The birds of Natal 1 are of 
many species; some have beautiful plumage, but none of them, 
with the exception of the canary, are to be considered as songsters. 
Among the larger birds are cranes, herons, the ibis, storks, eagles, 
vultures, falcons, hawks, kites, owls, the secretary birds, pelicans, 
flamingoes, wild duck and geese, gulls, and of game birds, the paauw, 
koraan, pheasant, partridge, guinea fowl and quail. The other birds 
include parrots, toucans, gaudily coloured cuckoos, lories, swallows, 
shrikes, sun-birds, kingfishers, weavers, finches, wild pigeons and 
crows. The otter is found in some of the rivers, which are also fre- 
quented, near their mouths, by turtles. These last are also found 
in the coast lagoons and sometimes are of great size. Iguanas, 4 and 
5 ft. long, are found on the wooded banks of the rivers; small 
lizards and chameleons are common, and there are several varieties 
oftortoise. 

Of snakes there are about forty distinct species or varieties. 
The most dreaded by the natives arc called *' tmamba,' 1 of which 
there are at least eight different kinds; these snakes elevate and 
throw themselves forward, and have been known to pursue a horse- 
man. One sortof imamba, named by the natives indhlondhlo" 
is crested, and its body is of a bright flame colour. The sluggish 

Puff-adder (Clotho arietans) is common and very dangerous. A 
ooded snake (Naja haemachates), the intfezi of the natives, is 
dangerous, and spits or ejects its poison; besides this there are a 
few other varieties of the cobra species. The largest of the serpent 
tribe, however, is^ the python (Hortulia natalensis), called inhlwati 
by the natives^ its usual haunts are by streams amongst rocky 
boulders and in jungles, and instances are recorded of its strangling 

	1 See R. B. and J. D. Woodward, Natal Birds (Maritzburg, 1899). 

and crushing adult natives. It is common in the coast districts, 
and is sometimes 20 ft. long. Insects abound in great numbers, 
the most troublesome and destructive being the tick {Ixodes natal- 
ensis), which infests the pasturage, and the white ant (Termes 
tnordax). Occasionally vast armies of locusts or caterpillars advance 
over large tracts of country, devouring all vegetation in their line 
of march. The fish moth, a steel-grey slimy active fish -shaped 
insect, is found in every house and is very destructive. Fish of 
excellent quality and in great quantities abound on the coast. They 
include shad, rock cod, mackerel, mullet, bream and soles; sharks, 
stingrays, cuttlefish and the octopus are also common in the waters 
off the coast of Natal. Prawns, crayfish and oysters are also ob- 
tainable, and turtle (Chelonia mydas) are frequently captured. 
Freshwater scale-fish are mostly full of bones, but fine eels and 
barbel arc plentiful in the rivers. Trout have been introduced into 
some of the higher reaches of the rivers. 

Inhabitants. — At the census of 1904 the population of the 
province, including Zululand, was i,io8,754. 2 Of this total 
&'&%, or 97>i°9, ^ere Europeans, 9%, or 100,918, Asiatics and 
the rest natives of South Africa, mainly of Zulu-Kaffir stock. 
Of the 824,063 natives, 203,373 lived in Zululand. The white and 
Asiatic population nearly doubled in the thirteen years since 
the previous census, allowance being made for the Utrecht and 
Vryheid districts, which in 1891 formed part of the Transvaal. 
Of the total population 985,167 live in rural areas, the average 
density for the whole country being 31-34 per sq. m. The 
white population is divided into 56,758 males and 40,351 females. 
Of the white inhabitants the great majority are British. Some 
12,500 are of Dutch extraction; these live chiefly in the districts 
of Utrecht and Vryheid. There are also about 4500 Natalians of 
German extraction, settled mainly in the New Hanover and 
Umzimkulu districts. The Asiatics at the 1904 census were 
divided into 63,497 rnales and 37,421 females. They include a 
few high caste Indians, Arabs and Chinese, but the great majority 
are Indian coolies. The Asiatics are mainly congregated in the 
coast districts between the Umzimkulu and Tugela rivers. 
In this region (which includes Durban) the Asiatic population 
was 61,854. In none of the inland districts did the Asiatic 
inhabitants number 2000. The coolies are employed chiefly on 
the sugar, coffee, cotton and other plantations, a small proportion 
being employed in the coal-mines. 

The native inhabitants of Natal proper were almost exter- 
minated by the Zulus in the early years of the 19th century. 
Before that period the natives of what is now Natal proper were 
estimated to number about 100,000. In 1838 when the Zulu 
power was first checked the natives had been reduced to about 
10,000. The stoppage of intertribal wars by the British, aided 
by a great influx of refugees from Zululand, led to a rapid increase 
of the population. With the exception of a few Bushmen, 
who cling to the slopes of the Drakensberg, all the natives are of 
Bantu stock. Before the Zulu devastations the natives belonged 
to the Ama-Xosa branch of the Kaffirs and are said to have been 
divided into ninety-four different tribes; to-day all the tribes 
have a large admixture of Zulu blood (see Kaffirs, Zululand 
and Bantu Languages). The Natal natives have preserved 
their tribal organization to a considerable extent. Nearly 50% 
live in special reserves or locations, the area set apart for native 
occupation being about 4000 sq. m. exclusive of Zululand. 
Most of the remainder are employed on or live upon farms owned 
by whites, paying annual rents of from £1 to £$ or more. There 
were, however, in 1904, 69,746 male natives and 10,232 female 
natives in domestic service. Of the tribes who were in Natal 
before the Zulu invasion about 181 2, the two largest are the 
Abatembu (who are in five main divisions and number about 
30,000) and the Amakwabe (seven divisions and about 20,000 
people). Other large tribes are the Amanyuswa (ten divisions — 
38,000 people), the Amakunu (three divisions — 26,000 people), 
and the Amabomvu (five divisions — 25,000 people). The three 
last tribes are among those which sought refuge in Natal from 
Zulu persecution, before the establishment of British rule in 
1843. The number of half-castes is remarkably small, at the 
census of 1904 the number of " mixed and others," which 
includes Griquas and Hottentots and non-aboriginal negroes, 
was only 6686. 

Chief Towns. — The seat of the provincial government is Pietcr- 
maritzburg (q.v.), commonly called Maritzbur^ (or P.M.B.), with a 
population (1904) of 31,199. It is 71 m. by rail N.N.W. of Durban 
(q.v.)> the seaport and only large city in Natal, pop. 67,842. Lady- 
smith (q.v.), pop. 5568, ranks next in size. It is in the north-west 
of the province, is famous for its investment by the Boers in 1899- 
1900 and is an important railway junction. North-east of Lady- 
smith are Dundee (281 1) and Newcastle (2950). Dundee is the centre 
of the coal-mining district. Newcastle is also a mining town, but 
depends chiefly on its large trade in wool. It is named after the 
duke of Newcastle who was secretary for the colonies in 1852 and 
1859. Vryheid (2287) is in the centre of a highly mineralized 
district. Utrecht (860) lies between Newcastle and Vryheid, and 
was one of the first towns founded by the Transvaal Boers. - There 
are coal-mines on the town lands. Greytown (2436), a wool and 
wattle trading centre, is in central Natal. Verulam (1325), 19 m. 
along the coast north of Durban, serves as centre for sugar, tobacco 
and fruit plantations. It was founded by emigrants from St Albans, 
England — whence the name. Port Shcpstone, at the mouth of the 
Umzimkulu river, is the natural outlet for south-west Natal. Est- 
court is a trading centre, 75 m. by rail N.N.W. of Pietermaritzburg 
and is 29 m. distant from the village of Weenen (" Weeping "), so 
named by the first Boer settlers in memory of a Zulu raid. Another 
village, Colcnso, on the south bank of the Tugela, 16 m. by rail 
south of Ladysmith, was the headquarters of Sir Redvers Buller 
at the battle of Colenso on the 15th of December 1899. 

Communications. — Durban (Port Natal) is in regular communica- 
tion with Europe via Cape Town and via Suez by several lines of 
steamers, the chief being the boats of the Union-Castle line, which 
sail from Southampton and follow the west coast route, those of 
the German East Africa line, which sail from Hamburg and go via 
the east coast route and those of the Austrian Lloyd from Trieste, 
also by the east coast route. By the Union-Castle boats there is a 
weekly mail service to England. There are also two direct lines of 
steamers between London and Durban (a distance of 6993 nautical 
miles), average passage about twenty-six days; the mail route taking 
twenty to twenty-two days. Durban is also in regular and frequent 
communication by passenger steamers with the other South African 
ports, as well as Mauritius, Zanzibar, &c, and with India, Australia, 
the United States and South America. The works which have made 
Port Natal the finest harbour in South Africa are described under 
Durban. 

The first railway built in South Africa was a 2-m. line from 
The Point (or harbour) to the town of Durban. It was opened for 
traffic in i860 and in 1874 was extended some 4 m. to the Umgeni 
river. This line was of 4 ft. 8? in. gauge and was^ privately owned, 
but, when in 1876 the Natal government determined to build and 
own a railway system which should in time cover the country, the 
existing line was bought out and the gauge altered to 3 ft. 6 in. 
On this, the normal South African gauge, all the Natal railways, 
save a few 2-ft. branch lines, are built. t The main line starts from 
Durban, and passing through Pietermaritzburg (71 m.), Ladysmith 
(190 m.) and Newcastle (268 m.) pierces the Drakensberg at Laing's 
Nek by a tunnel 2213 ft. long, and 3 m. beyond Charlestown reaches 
the Transvaal frontier at mile 307. Thence the railway is continued 
to Johannesburg, &c. The distances from Durban to the places 
mentioned by this route are: Johannesburg, 483 m.; Pretoria 
511 m.; Kimberley, 793 m.; Bulawayo, 1508 m.; Delagoa Bay, 
860 m. 

From Ladysmith a branch line runs north-west into the Orange 
Free State, crossing the Drakensberg at Van Reenen's Pass. This 
line is continued via Harrismith and Bethlehem to Kroonstad 
(393 m « from Durban) on the main Cape Town, Bloemfontein and 
Johannesburg railway and is the shortest route between Durban 
and Cape Town (1271 m.). It also affords via Bloemfontein the 
shortest route (622 m.) between Durban and Kimberley. From 
Glencoe Junction, 42 m. north of Ladysmith on the direct line to 
Johannesburg, a branch railway goes N.E. to the Dundee coal- 
fields, Vryheid (59 m.) and Hlobane (76 m.). Two lines branch off 
from Pietermaritzburg. One (62 m. long) goes N.E. to Greytown, 
serving the east-central part of the province; the other line (108 m. 
long) goes S.W. to Riverside Station, forming a link in the scheme 
for direct communication between Natal and East London and Port 
Elizabeth. 

Durban is the starting-point of two coast lines. The south coast 
line, which runs close to the sea, goes to Port Shepstone (79 m.). 
A 2-ft. gauge railway (102 m.), which leaves the south coast line at 
Alexandra Junction* (44 m. from Durban), runs N.W. by Stuarts- 
town and joins the Pietermaritzbur^-Riverside line. The north coast 
railway (167 m. long) crosses the Tugela 70 m. from Durban and 
continued through Zululand to Somkcle, the centre of the Santa 
Lucia coal-fields. 

As might be expected in a country possessing the physical features 
of Natal, the gradients and curves are exceptionally severe. Not 
less than 43 m. are upon grades of 1 in 30 and 1 in 35, and curves of 
300 to 350 ft. radius, while on over 100 m. more there are grades 
under 1 in 60 and curves of less than 450 ft. radius. The main trunk 
line reaches an altitude of 3054 ft. at a point 58 m. distant from 
Durban; after falling 1000 ft. in its farther progress to Pieter- 
maritzburg, it again rises, 12 m. after leaving that city, to a height 
of 3700 ft. above the sea; at a point 134 m. from Durban it has 
reached an altitude of 5152 ft., but on reaching Ladysmith, 191 m. 
from Durban, the altitude has decreased to 3284 ft. The summit 
of the Biggarsbcrg chain is crossed at a point 233 m. from the port, 
at a height of 4800 ft., and at Laing's Nek the altitude is 5399 ft. 
The Orange Free State line, after leaving Ladysmith, ascends by 
steep gradients the whole of its own course in Natal territory, and 
when it gains the summit at Van Reenen's Pass it is 5500 ft. above 
the sea. The mileage open in 1910 was 1173. The cost of construc- 
tion, to the same year, exceeded £14,000,000, the interest earned per 
cent since 1895 not being less than £3, 12s. in any one year. In out- 
lying districts post carts and ox wagons are the usual means of con- 
veyance. There are about 5000 m. of high roads kept in repair by 
the government. 

There is a well-organized postal and telegraphic service. Land 
lines connect Natal with every part of South Africa and with Nyasa- 
land and Ujiji. A submarine cable from Durban goes to Zanzibar 
and Aden, whence there is communication with every quarter of the 
globe. The first telegraph line in Natal was opened in 1873; * n 
1878 communication was established with Cape Town and in the 
following year with Delagoa Bay. 

Agriculture and Allied Industries. — The diversity of soil and climate 
leads to a great diversity in the agricultural produce. The chief 
drawback to farming in the midland and upper districts is the con- 
siderable proportion of stony ground, and, in some cases, the lack 
of running water. The area of land under tillage is less than a 
twentieth of the whole surface, the crop most extensively grown 
being maize or " mealies." This is universally grown by the natives 
and forms their staple food; it is also grown by the Indians, and 
by the white farmers for export. Besides maize the crops cultivated 
by the natives are Kaffir corn or amabele (Sorghum caffrorum) — 
used in the manufacture of utyuala, native beer — imfi {Sorghum 
saccharatum) f tobacco, pumpkins and sweet potatoes. The chief 
wealth of the natives consists, however, in their large herds of cattle 
(see infra). While maize thrives in every part of the country, 
wheat, barley and oats — cultivated by the white farmers — flourish 
only in the midlands and uplands. More important than the cereal 
crops are the tropical and sub-tropical products of the coast zone. 
Besides fruits of nearly all kinds there are cultivated in the low 
moist regions the sugar-cane, the tea, coffee and tobacco plants, 
arrowroot, cayenne pepper, cotton, &c. The area under sugar in 
1905 was 45,840 acres and the produce 532,067 cwt. (a large quantity 
of sugar-cane is grown for feeding stock). In the same year the 
production of tea was 1,633,178ft); of coffee, 24,859ft); of maize, 
2,101,470 bushels; of potatoes, 419,946 bushels; and of sweet 
potatoes, 181,195 bushels. The tea plant was first introduced in 
Natal in 1850, but little attention was paid to it until the failure of 
the coffee plantations about 1875, since when only small quantities 
of coffee have been produced. In 1877 renewed efforts were made 
to induce tea cultivation, and by 1881 it had become an established 
industry. The variety chiefly grown is the Assam indigenous. 
Most of the tea estates are situated in the coast belt north of Durban. 
The sugar cane, like tea, was first introduced in 1850, the first canes 
being brought from Mauritius. The industry is steadily growing, 
as arc the dependent manufactures of molasses and rum. The fruit 
industry is of considerable importance and by 1905 had reached a 
turnover of over £100,000 a year. 

Extensive areas in the midland and upland districts are devoted 
to the raising of stock. Horse-breeding is successfully carried on 
in the upper districts. The higher the altitude the healthier the 
animals and the greater their immunity from disease. Horse- 
sickness, a kind of malarial fever, which takes an epidemic form in 
very wet seasons, causes considerable loss. The Natal horse is small, 
wiry, and has great powers of endurance. Cattle-breeding is probably 
the most lucrative branch of stock-farming, the country being 
pre-eminently adapted for horned cattle. Rinderpest in 1 896-1 897 
swept through South Africa, and probably carried off in Natal from 
30 to 40 % of the stock of Europeans, while the natives' losses were 
even heavier. Serum and bile inoculation were the means of saving 
a considerable percentage of the herds. The farmers soon began to 
recover from their losses, but in 1908-1909 another serious loss of 
stock resulted from the ravages of East Coast fever. The cattle 
consist chiefly of the Zulu and Africander breeds, but attention 
has been given to improving the breed by the introduction of Short- 
horn, Devon and Holstein (or Friesland) stock. The chief market 
for cattle is Johannesburg. The principal breed of sheep is the 
merino, which does well in the higher altitudes. A Scab Act is in 
force, and is stringently carried out by government inspectors 
with most satisfactory results. The Angora goat thrives well in 
certain districts. Ostriches do well in the dry, arid valleys of the 
Tugela and Mooi rivers. In 1908 Europeans were returned as 
owning 32,000 horses, 220,000 horned cattle, 765,000 sheep, 68,000 
goats, 25,000 pigs, 960 ostriches and 384,000 poultry. Large herds 
of cattle — over 500,000 in the aggregate — are owned by the 
natives, who also possess vast flocks of goats and sheep. The 
dairy industry is well established, and Natal butter commands a- 

	I

ready sale. 

Valuable timber is obtained from the forests. Stinkwood is 
largely employed in the making of wagons, and isalso used for making 
furniture. Black ironwood is likewise used in building wagons, 
while sneezewood is largely utilized for supports for piers and other 
marine structures, being impervious to the attacks of the Teredo 
navalis. More important is the cultivation of the black" wattle 
(Acacia mollissima), which began in 1886, the bark being exported for 
tanning purposes, the wood also commanding a ready sale. This 
wattle thrives well in most localities, but especially in the highlands 
of central Natal. In 1905 the production of wattle bark was 13,620 
tons, and the area planted with the tree over 60,000 acres. Aloes 
and ramie are cultivated to some extent for their fibre. 

The government maintains experimental farms and forestry 
plantations and a veterinary department tocope with lung sickness, 
rinderpest, East Coast fever and such like diseases. It also conducts 
campaigns against locusts and other pests and helps irrigation 
settlements. By means of an Agricultural Bank it affords assistance 
to farmers. 

Mining. — There are several highly mineralized areas in the 
country. The existence of coal in the north-east districts on or near 
the surface of the ground was reported as early as 1839, but it was 
not until 1880 that steps were taken to examine the coalfields. 
This was done by F. W. North, who reported in 1881 that in the 
Klip river (Dundee) district there was an area of 1350 sq. m. that 
might be depended upon for the supply of coal, which is of all 
characters from lignite to anthracite. In 1889 the extension of the 
railway from Ladysmith through the coal area, first made coal- 
mining profitable. In 1896 the total output of coal was 216,106 
tons (valued at £108,053 at tne pit's mouth), in 1908 it had increased 
to 1,669,774 tons (valued at the pit's mouth at £737,169). There is a 
considerable trade in bunker and export coal at Durban, the coal 
bunkered having increased from 118,740 tons in 1900 to 710,777 in 
1.908. In the last-named year 446,915 tons of coal were exported. 
Besides the mines in the Newcastle and Dundee district there are 
extensive coal-fields at Hlobane in the Vryheid district and in Zulu- 
land (q.v.). Iron ore is widely distributed and is found in the neigh- 
bourhood of all the coal-fields. There are extensive copperand gold- 
yielding areas, and in some districts these metals are mined. On 
the lower Umzimkulu, near Port Shepstone, marble is found in great 
quantities. 

Commerce. — The chief exports, not all products of the province, 
are coal, wool, mohair, hides and skins, wattle bark, tea, sugar, 
fruits and jams. The import trade is of a most varied character, 
and a large proportion of the goods brought into the country are in 
transit to the Transvaal and Orange Free State, Natal affording, next 
to Delagoa Bay, the shortest route to the Rand. Textiles, largely 
cotton goods, hardware, mining and agricultural machinery, tobacco 
and foodstuffs form the bulk of the imports. In 1896 the value 
of exports was £1,785,000; in 1908 the value was £9,622,000. In 
1896 the imports were valued at £5,437.000, in 1908 at £8,330,000 
(a decrease of £2,300,000 compared with^ 1905). _ The bulk of these 
exports are to the Transvaal and neighbouring countries, and 
previously figure as imports, other exports, largely wool and hides, 
are first imported from the Transvaal. Over three-fifths of the 
imports are from Great Britain, and about one-seventh of the 
exports go to Great Britain. The shipping, which in 1874 was 
126,000 tons, was in 1884 1,013,000; in 1894, 1, 463^000; in 1904 
4,263,000; and in 1908, 5,028,000. Over six-sevenths of the shipping 
is British. 

Government and Constitution. — Natal was from 1893 to 1910 
a self-governing colony. It is now represented in the Union 
Parliament by eight senators and seventeen members of the 
House of Assembly. The qualifications for electors and members 
of the Assembly are the same, namely men of full age owning 
houses or land worth £50, or who rent sucb property of the yearly 
value of £10; or who, having lived three years in the province, 
have incomes of not less than £96 a year. 

Coloured persons are not, by name, excluded from the franchise, 
but no persons " subject to special laws and tribunals," x in which 
category all natives are included, are entitled to vote. Another 
law, 2 directed against Indians, excludes from the franchise, 
natives, or descendants of natives in the male line, of countries 
not possessing elective representative institutions. Exemption 
from the scope of these provisions may be granted by the 
governor-general and under such exemption a few Kaffirs are 
on the roll of electors. 

At the head of the provincial government is an administrator, 
appointed by the Union Ministry, who holds office for five 
years. He is assisted by an executive committee of four members 
elected by the provincial council. This council to which is 

	1 Act No. 2 (of the Natal Legislature) of 1883. 

	1 Act No. 8 of 1896. The Indians whose names were " rightly 
	contained " in the voters' rolls at the date of the act retain the 
	franchise. 

entrusted the management of affairs purely provincial consists 
of 25 members, elected by the parliamentary voters and each 
representing a separate constituency. The council sits for a 
statutory period of three years. For local government purposes 
the province is divided into counties or magisterial divisions; 
Zululand being under special jurisdiction. The chief towns — 
Durban, Maritzburg, Ladysmith, Newcastle and Dundee — are 
governed by municipal corporations and minor towns by local 
boards. 

Revenue and Expenditure. — Revenue is derived chiefly from 
customs and excise, railways, land sales, posts and telegraphs and a 
capitation tax. The expenditure is largely on reproductive works 
(railways, harbours, post office, &c), on the judiciary and police, 
education and military defence. _ The majority of these services are, 
since 1910, managed by the Union Government, but the provincial 
council has power to levy direct taxation, and (with the consent 
of the Union Government) to raise loans for purely provincial 
purposes. Its revenues and powers are those pertaining to local 
government. Some particulars follow as to the financial position of 
Natal previous to the establishment of the Union. 

In 1846, the first year of Natal's separate existence, the revenue 
was £3073 and the expenditure £6905. In 1852 the revenue was 
£27,158 and the expenditure £24,296, and in 1862 the conesponding 
figures were £98,799 and £85,928. In 1872 revenue had risen to 
£180,499 and expenditure to £132,978. Ten years later the figures 
were, revenue £657,738, expenditure £659,031. The rise of Johannes- 
burg and the opening up of the Dundee coal-fields, as well as the 
development. of agriculture, now caused a rapid increase on both 
sides of the account. In 1888 the revenue for the first time exceeded 
a million, the figures for that year being, revenue £1,130,614, ex- 
penditure £781,326; in 1 898-1 899 the figures were £2,081,349 and 
£1,914,725. The Anglo-Boer War (1 899-1902) caused both revenue 
and expenditure to rise abnormally, while the depression in trade 
which followed the war adversely affected the exchequer. In 1903- 
1904 there was a slight credit balance, the figures being, revenue 
£4,160,145, expenditure £4,071,439. For the next four years 
there were deficits, but in 19081-1909 a surplus was realized, the 
revenue being £3,569,275 and the expenditure £3,530,576. For 
1909-19 10, the last year of Natal's existence as a colony, the revenue, 
£4,035,000, again exceeded the expenditure. The public debt, 
£2,101,500 in 1882, had risen at the close of the Boer War in 1902 
to £12,519,000, and was in June 1909, £21,420,000. 

Defence. — A small garrison of imperial troops is quartered at 
Maritzburg. The provincial force consists of a militia, fully equipped 
and armed with modern weapons. It is divided into mounted rifle- 
men, about 1900 strong, four field batteries of 3^0 men and two 
infantry battalions, each of over 800 men. There is also an armed 
and mounted police force of 870 Europeans. Military training is 
compulsory on all lads over ten attending government schools. 
The boys are organized in cadet corps. A senior cadet corps is 
formed of youths between sixteen and twenty. There are also many 
rifle associations, the members of which are liable to be called out 
for defence. Durban harbour is defended by batteries with heavy 
modern guns. The batteries are manned by the naval corps (150 
strong) of the Natal militia. Natal makes an annual contribution of 
£35iOOO towards the upkeep of the British navy. 

Law and Justice. — The South Africa Act 1909 established a 
Supreme Court of South Africa, the former supreme court of Natal 
becoming a provincial division of the new supreme court. The 
Roman-Dutcn law, as accepted and administered by the courts of 
Cape Colony up to 1845 (the date of the separation of Natal from the 
Cape), is the law of the land, save as modified by ordinances and 
laws enacted by the local legislature, mostly founded upon imperial 
statute law. The law of evidence is the same as that of the courts 
of England. Natives, however, are not justiceable under the Roman- 
Dutch law, but by virtue of letters patent passed in 1848 they are 
judged by native laws and customs, except so far as these may be 
repugnant to natural equity. The native laws were first codified in 
1878, in 1887 a board was appointed for their revision, and the new 
code came into operation in 1901. Provision is made whereby a 
native can obtain relief from the operation of native^ law and be 
subject to the colonial law (Law No. 28 of 1865). Special laws have 
been passed for the benefit of the coolie immigrants. The ad- 
ministration of justice is conducted by magistrates' courts, circuit 
courts and the provincial division of the supreme court. The magi- 
strates have both civil and criminal jurisdiction in minor cases. 
Appeals can be made from the magistrates* decisions to the pro- 
vincial or circuit court.^ The provincial court, consisting of a judge 
president and three puisne judges, sits in Pietermaritzburg and has 
mrisdiction over all causes whether affecting natives or Europeans. 
The judges also hold circuit courts at Durban and other places. 
Appeals from the circuit courts can be made to the provincial court; 
and from the provincial court appeals lie to the appellate division 
of the Supreme Court of South Africa, sitting at Bloemfontein. 
Criminal cases are tried before a single judge and a jury of nine — 
of whom not fewer than seven determine the verdict. There is a 
vice-admiralty court, of which the judge-president is judge and 
commissary. In native cases the chiefs have civil jurisdiction in 
disputes among their own tribesmen and criminal jurisdiction over 
natives except in capital cases, offences against the person or 
property of non-natives, pretended witchcraft, cases arising out of 
marriages by Christian rites, &c. An appeal lies to a magistrates' 
court from every judgment of a native chief, and from the magis- 
trates' judgment on such appeal to a native high court. This native 
high court consists of a judge-president and two other judges, and sits 
in full court at Maritzburg not less than three months and at Eshowe 
not less than once in the year. There is no jury in this tribunal 
and single judges may hold circuit courts. _ With certain exceptions 
reserved for the provincial court (such as insolvency, ownership of 
immovable property and divorce), the native high court exercises 
jurisdiction when all parties to the suit are natives; it also has 
jurisdiction when the complainant is not a native, but all other 
parties to the suit are natives. 

Religion. — The majority of the white inhabitants are Protestants, 
the bodies with the largest number of adherents being the Anglicans, 
Dutch Reformed Church, Presbyterians and Wesleyans. The 
Anglicans are divided into two parties — those belonging to " the 
Church of the Province of South Africa," the body in communion 
with the Church of England, and those who act independently and 
constitute " the Church of England in Natal/* The schism arose 
out of the alleged heterodox views of Bishop Colenso (<?.».), who had 
been created bishop of Natal by letters patent in 1853. In 1863 
the metropolitan of Cape Town, as head of the Church of the Province 
of South Africa, excommunicated Dr Colenso and consecrated a rival 
bishop for Natal, who took the title of bishop of Pietermaritzburg. 
Dr Colenso, who obtained a decision of the privy council confirming 
his claim to be bishop of Natal and possessor of the temporalities 
attached to the bishopric, died in 1883, After his death those 
members of the Anglican community who objected to the constitu- 
tion of the provincial church maintained their organization while the 
temporalities were placed in the hands of curators. Reunion in 
spiritual matters has, however, been practically effected. Moreover, 
an act of the Natal parliament passed in 1909 placed the temporalities 
into commission in the persons of the bishop and other trustees of 
the Natal diocese of the Provincial Church ; reservations being made 
in favour of four congregations at that time unwilling to unite with 
the main body of churchmen. 1 At the census of 1904 the Anglicans 
numbered 40,880, The Presbyterians numbered 12,184, the Wes- 
Icyan Methodists 11,992, the Dutch Reformed Church 11,340, the 
Lutherans 4852, and the Baptists 2193. The Roman Catholics, at 
whose head is a vicar-apostolic, numbered 10,419. All these figures 
are exclusive of natives, of whom the churches named — notably the 
-Anglicans and Wesleyans — have many converts. The Jewish com- 
munity in 1904 numbered 1496. Of the Asiatics, 87,234 were classed 
as Hindus and 10,111 as Mahommedans. 

Education. — Education other than elementary is controlled by the 
Union government. Public schools, and private schools aided by 
provincial grants provide elementary education for white children. 
Education is neither compulsory nor free; but the fees are low 
(is. to 5s. a month) and few children are kept away from school. 
There are government secondary and art schools at Durban and 
Maritzburg, and a Technical Institute at Durban. For higher edu- 
cation provision was made by the affiliation of Natal to the Cape of 
Good Hope University and by exhibitions tenable at English universi- 
ties. An act of the Natal legislature, passed December 1909, provided 
for the establishment at Maritzburg of the Natal University College, 
the course of studies to be such as from time to time prescribed by 
the Cape University. In 1910 £30,000 was voted for the University 
College buildings. State aid and inspection is given to private 
schools for natives. In the native schools — almost all maintained by 
Christian missions — Zulu and English are taught, the subjects taken 
being usually reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar, geography 
and history. The state provides elementary and higher grade 
schools for Indian children. In 1908 there were 52 government 
schools and 472 schools under inspection; 304 European, 21 coloured, 
168 native and 31 Indian, with an aggregate attendance of 30,598 
scholars. There are in addition many private and denominational 
schools and colleges not receiving state aid. Of these, two of the 
best known are Hilton College and Hermansberg College, many 
prominent Natalians having been educated at one or the other of 
these establishments. To encourage the instruction of children 
who by reason of distance^ cannot attend a government or govern- 
ment-aided school, grants-in-aid are made for each pupil attending 
farm schools. 

The Press. — The first newspaper in Natal was the Natalier, a 
Dutch print published at Maritzburg; it was succeeded by the 
Patriot. The first English paper was the Natal Witness, started in 
1845 and still one of the leading organs of public opinion. In 1851 
the Natal Times appeared, and is now continued as the Times of 
Natal. Another leading paper, the Natal Mercury, dates from 1852. 
It is a morning newspaper and is issued at Durban. The Natal 
Advertizer is a Durban evening paper. Sir John Robinson, the first 
premier of Natal under responsible government, was the editor of 
the Mercury from i860 until he became prime minister in 1893. 

	1 For a summary of the Natal church controversy see Tke Guardian 
	(London March 11, 1910). 
	XIX. 9 

In 1886 a new Dutch paper, De Afrikaner, was started at Maritzburg. 
The Kaffirs have their own organ, Ipipa lo Hlunga (the paper of 
grievances), issued at Maritzburg, and the Asiatics, Indian Opinion, 
a weekly paper started in 1903 and printed in English, Gujarati, 
Hindi and Tamil. Local papers are published weekly at Ladysmith, 
Dundee and Greytown. The Agricultural Journal, a government 
publication issued fortnightly, is of great service in the promotion of 
agricultural knowledge. 

History. 

Vasco da Gama on his voyage to India sighted the bluff at 
the entrance to the bay now forming the harbour of Durban 
on Christmas Day 1497 and named the country Terra 
Natalis, Da Gama made no landing here and, like Discover y 
the rest of South Africa, Natal was neglected by the Jtetom^ 
Portuguese, whose nearest settlement was at Delagoa 
Bay. In 1576 Manuel de Mesquita Perestrellp, commanded by 
King Sebastian to explore the coast of South Africa and report 
on suitable harbours, made a rough chart, even then of little use 
to navigators, which is of value as exhibiting the most that was 
known of the country by its discoverers before the advent of their 
Dutch rivals, who established themselves at Cape Town in 1652. 
Perestrello states that Natal has no ports but otherwise he gives 
a fairly accurate description of the country — noting particu- 
larly the abundance of animals and the density of the population. 
The first detailed accounts of the country were received from 
shipwrecked mariners. In 1683 the English ship " Johanna " 
went ashore near Delagoa Bay and the crew made a remarkable 
journey overland to Cape Town, passing through Natal, where 
they were kindly received by the natives. About the same time 
(in 1684) an English ship put into Port Natal (as the bay came 
to be known) and purchased ivory from the natives, who, how- 
ever, refused to deal in slaves. In May 1685 another English 
ship the " Good Hope " was wrecked in crossing the bar at Port 
Natal and in February 1686 the " Stavenisse," a Dutch East 
Indiaman, was wrecked a little farther south. Survivors of 
both vessels lived for nearly a year at Port Natal and there built 
a boat in which they made the voyage to Cape Town in twelve 
days. They brought with them 3 tons of ivory. This fact 
and their reports of the immense herds of elephants which roamed 
the hush led Simon van der Stell, then governor at Cape Town, 
to despatch (1689) the ship " Noord " to Port Natal, with instruc- 
tions to her commander to open up a trade in ivory and to acquire 
possession of the bay. From the chief of the Amatuli tribe, 
who inhabited the adjacent district, the bay was " purchased " 
for about £50 worth of goods. No settlement was then made 
and in 1705 the son of the chief repudiated the bargain. In 
1 721 the Cape government did form a settlement at the bay, 
but it was soon afterwards abandoned. Thereafter for nearly 
a hundred years" Natal was again neglected by white men. 
A ship now and again put into the bay, but the dangerous bar 
at its entrance militated against its frequent use. When in 
1824 the next attempt was made by Europeans to form a settle- 
ment at the bay, Cape Colony had passed from the Dutch 
into the possession of Great Britain, while in Natal great 
changes had come over the land as a result of wars between the 
natives. 

From the records of the 17th and 18th centuries it is apparent 
that the people then inhabiting Natal were Bantu-negroes of 
the Kaffir (Ama Xosa) branch. There is no mention of Hotten- 
tots, and the few Bushmen who dwelt in the upper regions by the 
Drakensberg did not come into contact with Europeans. The 
sailors of the " Stavenisse " reported the most numerous and 
most powerful tribe to be the Abambo, while that which came 
most in contact with the whites was the Amatuli, as it occupied 
a considerable part of the coast-land. These Kaffirs appear to 
have been more given to agriculture and more peaceful than 
their neighbours in Kaffraria and Cape Colony, But the quiet of 
the country was destroyed by the inroads of Chaka, the chief of 
the Zulus (see Zululand). Chaka between 1818 and 1820 
ravaged the whole of what is now known as Natal, and after 
beating his foes in battle, butchered the women, children and 
old men, incorporating the young men in his impis. The popula- 
tion was greatly reduced and large areas left without a single 
inhabitant. By right of conquest Chaka became undisputed 
master of the country. 

Such was the situation when the first British settlement was 
made in Natal. In 1823 Francis George Farewell, formerly a 
lieutenant in the British navy, with other merchants of Cape 
Town, formed a company to trade with the natives of the south- 
east coast. In the brig " Salisbury," commanded by James S. 
King, who had been a midshipman in the navy, Farewell visited 
Port Natal, St Lucia and Delagoa Bays. The voyage was not 
successful as a trading venture, but Farewell was so impressed 
with the possibilities of Natal both for trade and colonization that 
he resolved to establish himself at the port. He went thither with 
ten companions, among them Henry Francis Fynn. All the rest 
save Farewell and Fynn speedily repented of their adventure and 
returned to the Cape, but the two who remained were joined by 
three sailors, John Cane, Henry Ogle and Thomas Holstead, a 
lad. Farewell, Fynn and the others went to the royal kraal of 
Chaka, and, having cured him of a wound and made him various 
presents, obtained a document, dated the 7th of August 1824, 
ceding to " F. G. Farewell & Company entire and full possession 
in perpetuity " of a tract of land including " the port or harbour 
of Natal." On the 27th of the same month Farewell hoisted the 
The first Union Jack at the port and declared the territory he 
British had acquired a British possession. In 1825 he was 
settle' joined by King, who had meantime visited England 
meaU and had obtained from the government a letter of 
recommendation to Lord Charles Somerset, governor of the Cape, 
granting King permission to settle at Natal. Farewell, King and 
Fynn made independent settlements at various parts of the 
bay, where a few Amatuli stiD lingered. They lived, practically, 
as Kaffir chiefs, trading with Chaka and gathering round them 
many refugees from that monarch's tyranny. Early in 1828 
King, accompanied by two of Chaka's indunas, voyaged in the 
" Elizabeth and Susan," a small schooner built by the settlers, 
to Port Elizabeth. He appears to have been coldly received by 
the authorities, who were even unable to ascertain the nature of 
Chaka's embassy. Soon after his return to Natal King died, and 
in the same month (September 1828) Chaka was murdered by 
his brother Dingaan. In the December following Farewell went 
in the " Elizabeth and Susan " to Port Elizabeth. On this 
occasion the authorities were more hostile than before to the 
Natal pioneers, for they confiscated the schooner on the ground 
that it was unregistered and that it came from a foreign port. 
Farewell was not daunted, and in September 1829 set out to 
return overland to Port Natal. He was, however, murdered in 
Pondoland by a chief who was at enmity with the Zulus. Fynn 
thus became leader of the whites at the port, who were much at 
the mercy of Dingaan. In 1831 that chief raided their settle- 
ments, the whites all fleeing south of the Umzimkulu; but at 
Dingaan's invitation they soon returned. Dingaan declared 
Fynn his representative and " great chief of the Natal Kaffirs." 
In 1834, however, Fynn accepted a post under the Cape govern- 
ment and did not return to Natal for many years. It was in this 
year that a petition from Cape Town merchants asking for the 
creation of a British colony at Natal was met by the statement 
that the Cape finances would not permit the establishment of 
a new dependency. The merchants, however, despatched an 
expedition under Dr Andrew Smith to inquire into the possibilities 
of the country, and the favourable nature of his report induced a 
party of Dutch farmers under Piet Uys to go thither also. Both 
Dr Smith and Uys travelled overland through Kaffraria, and 
were well received by the English living at the bay. The next 
step was taken by the settlers at the port, who in 1835 resolved 
to lay out a town, which they named Durban, after Sir Benjamin 
d'Urban, then governor of Cape Colony. At the same time the 
settlers, who numbered about 50, sent a memorial to the governor 
calling attention to the fact that they were acknowledged rulers 
over a large tract of territory south of the Tugela, and asking 
that this territory should be proclaimed a British colony under 
the name of Victoria and that a governor and council be appointed. 
To all these requests* no official answer was returned. The 
settlers had been joined in the year named (1835) by Captain 

	voor* 
	trekkers* 

Gardiner, a naval officer, whose chief object was the evangeliza- 
tion of the natives. With the support of the traders he founded 
a mission station on the hill overlooking the bay. In 1837 
Gardiner was given authority by the British government to 
exercise jurisdiction over the traders. They, however, refused 
to acknowledge Gardiner's authority, and from the Cape govern- 
ment he received no support. 1 It was not until their hand was 
forced by the occupation of the interior by Dutch farmers that 
the Cape authorities at length intervened. 

The British settlers had, characteristically, reached Natal 
mainly by way of the sea; the new tide of immigration was by 
land — the voortrekkers streamed through the passes of A H . 
the Drakensberg, bringing with them their wives and ofthe 
children and vast herds of cattle. The reasons which Dutch 
caused the exodus from the Cape are discussed else- 
where (see South Africa and Cape Colony), here it is 
only necessary to point out that those emigrants who entered 
Natal shared with those who settled elsewhere an intense desire 
to be free from British control. The first emigrant Boers to enter 
the country were led by Pieter Retief (c. 1 780-1838), a man of 
Huguenot descent and of marked ability, who had formerly lived 
on the eastern frontier of Cape Colony and had suffered severely 
in the Kaffir wars. Passing through the almost deserted upper 
regions Retief arrived at the bay in October 1837. He went 
thence to Dingaan's kraal with the object of securing a formal 
cession of territory to the Dutch farmers. Dingaan consented 
on condition that the Boers recovered for him certain cattle 
stolen by another chief; this task Retief accomplished, and with 
the help of the Rev. F. Owen, a missionary then living at 
Dingaan's kraal, a deed of cession was drawn up in English and 
signed by Dingaan and Retief on the 4th of February 1838. 
Two days after the signature of the deed Retief and all of his 
party, 66 whites, besides Hottentot servants, were treacherously 
murdered by Dingaan's orders. The Zulu king then commanded 
his impis to kill all the Boers who had entered Natal. The Zulu 
forces crossed the Tugela the same day, and the most advanced 
parties of the Boers were massacred, many at a spot near where 
the town of Weenen now stands, its name (meaning wailing or 
weeping) commemorating the event. Other of the farmers 
hastily laagered and were able to repulse the Zulu attacks; the 
assailants suffering serious loss at a fight near the Bushman's 
river. Nevertheless in one week after the murder of Retief 
600 Boers — men, women and children — had been killed by the 
Zulus. The English settlers at the bay, hearing of the attack on 
the Boers, determined to make a diversion in their favour, and 
some 20 men under the command of R. Biggar and with a 
following of 700 friendly Zulus crossed the Tugela near its mouth. 
In a desperate fight (April 17) with a strong force of the 
enemy the English were overwhelmed and only four Europeans 
escaped to the bay. Pursued by the Zulus, all the surviving 
inhabitants of Durban were compelled for a time to take refuge 
on a ship then in harbour. After the Zulus retired, less than a 
dozen Englishmen returned to live at the port; the missionaries, 
hunters and other traders returned to the Cape. Meantime the 
Boers, who had repelled the Zulu attacks on their laagers, had been 
joined by others from the Drakensberg, and about 400 men under 
Hendrik Potgieter and Piet Uys advanced to attack Dingaan. 
On the nth of April, however, they fell into a trap laid by the 
Zulus and with difficulty cut their way out. Among those slain 
were Piet Uys and his son Dirk, aged 15, who rode by his side. 
The Boer farmers were now in a miserable plight, but towards the 
end of the year they received reinforcements, and in December 
460 men set out under Andries Pretorius to avenge themselves 
on the Zulus. On Sunday the 16th of December, while laagered 
near the Umslatos river, they were attacked by over 10,000 
Zulus. The Boers had firearms, the Zulus their assegais only, 
and after a three hours' fight the Zulus were totally defeated, 
losing thousands killed, while the farmers' casualties were under 

	1 Captain Allen Francis Gardiner (1794-1851) left Natal in 1838, 
	subsequently devoting himself to missionary work in South America, 
	being known as the missionary to Patagonia. He died of starvation 
	in Tierra del Fuego. 

a dozen. (This memorable victory is annually commemorated 
by the Boers as Dingaan's Day, while the Umslatos, which ran 
red with the blood of the slain, was renamed Blood river.) 
Dingaan fied, the victorious Boers entered the royal kraal, gave 
decent burial to the skeletons of Retief and his party, and regarded 
themselves as now undisputed masters of Natal. They had 
recovered from a leather pouch which Retief carried the deed by 
which Dingaan ceded " to Retief and his countrymen the place 
called Port Natal together with all the lands annexed ... as 
far as the land may be useful and in my possession." This was 
the 5th or 6th cession made by Chaka or Dingaan of the same 
territory to different individuals. In every case the overlordship 
of the Zulus was assumed. 

Returning south, Pretorius and his commando were surprised 
to learn that Port Natal had been occupied on the 4th of December 
by a detachment of the 72nd Highlanders sent thither from the 
Cape. The emigrant farmers had, with the assent of the few 
remaining Englishmen at Port Natal, in May 1838 issued a 
proclamation taking possession of the port. This had been 
followed by an intimation from the governor of the Cape (Major- 
General Sir George Napier) inviting the emigrants to return to the 
colony, and stating that whenever he thought it desirable he 
should take military possession of the port. In sanctioning the 
occupation of the port the British government of the day had no 
intention of making Natal a British colony, but wished to prevent 
the Boers establishing an independent republic upon the coast 
with a harbour through which access to the interior could be 
gained. After remaining at the port just over a year the 
Highlanders were withdrawn, on Christmas Eve 1839. Mean- 
time the Boers had founded Pietermaritzburg and made it the 
seat of their volksraad. They rendered their power in Natal 
absolute, for the time, in the following month, when they joined 
with Panda, Dingaan 's brother, in another attack on the Zulu 
king. Dingaan was utterly defeated and soon afterwards 
perished, Panda becoming king in his stead by favour of the Boers. 

At this time, had the affairs of the Boer community been 
managed with prudence and sagacity they might have estab- 
lished an enduring state. But their impatience of control, 
reflected in the form of government adopted, led to disastrous 
consequences. Legislative power was vested, nominally, in the 
volksraad (consisting of twenty-four members), while the president 
and executive were changed every three months. But whenever 
any measure of importance was to be decided a meeting was 
called of het publiek, that is, of all who chose to attend, to 
sanction or reject it. " The result," says Theal, " was utter 
anarchy. Decisions of one day were frequently reversed the 
next, and every one held himself free to disobey any law that he 
did not approve of. . . . Public opinion of the hour in each 
section of the community was the only force in the land" 
(History of South Africa 1834-1854, chap. xliv.). While such 
was the domestic state of affairs during the period of self-govern- 
ment, the settlers cherished large territorial views. They were 
in loose alliance with and in quasi-supremacy over the Boer 
communities which had left the Cape and settled at Winburg 
and at Potchefstroom. They had declared themselves a free 
and independent state under the title of " The Republic of 
Port Natal and adjacent countries," 1 and sought (September 
1840) from Sir George Napier at the Cape an acknowledgment 
of their independence by Great Britain. Sir George, being 
without definite instructions from England, could give no decisive 
answer, but he was friendly disposed to the Natal farmers. 
This feeling was, however, changed by what Sir George (and many 
of the Dutch in Natal also) thought a wilful and unjustifiable 
attack (December 1840) on a tribe of Kaffirs on the southern, 
or Cape Colony, frontier by a commando under Andries Pretorius, 
which set out, nominally, to recover stolen cattle. Having 
at length received an intimation from London that the queen 
f could not acknowledge the independence of her own subjects, 
but that the trade of the emigrant farmers would be placed 
on the same footing as that of any other British settlement, 
upon their receiving a military force to exclude the interference 

	1 Commonly called the Republic of Natalia or Natal. 

with or possession of the country by any other European power," 
Sir George communicated this decision to the volksraad in 
September 1841. Under the arrangement proposed the Boers 
might easily have secured the benefits of self-government, 
subject to an acknowledgment of British supremacy, together 
with the advantage of military protection, for the British govern- 
ment was then extremely reluctant to extend its colonial re- 
sponsibilities. The Boers, however, strongly resented the conten- 
tion of the British that they could not shake off British nationality 
though beyond the bounds of any recognized British possession, 
nor were they prepared to see their only port garrisoned by 
British troops, and they rejected Napier's overtures. Napier, 
therefore, on the 2nd of December 1841, issued a proclamation 
in which he stated that in consequence of the emigrant farmers 
refusing to be treated as British subjects and of their attitude 
towards the Kaffir tribes he intended resuming military occupation 
of Port Natal. This proclamation was answered in a lengthy 
minute, dated the 21st of February 1842, drawn up by J. N. 
Boshof (afterwards president of the Orange Free State), by far 
the ablest of the Dutch who had settled in Natal. In this minute 
the farmers ascribed all their troubles to one cause, British 
namely, the absence of a representative government, *«rf 
which had been repeatedly asked for by them while Dat ^J a 
still living in Cape Colony and as often denied or 
delayed, and concluded by a protest against the occupation 
of any part of their territory by British troops. An incident 
which happened immediately after these events greatly en- 
couraged the Boers to persist in their opposition to Great Britain. 
In March 1842 a Dutch vessel sent out by G. G. Ohrig, an 
Amsterdam merchant who sympathized warmly with the cause 
of the emigrant farmers, reached port Natal, and its supercargo, 
J. A. Smellekamp (a man who subsequently played a part in 
the early history of the Transvaal and Orange Free State), con- 
cluded a treaty with the volksraad assuring them of the pro- 
tection of Holland. The Natal Boers believed the Netherlands to 
be one of the great powers of Europe, and were firmly persuaded 
that its government would aid them in resisting England. 

On the 1st of April Captain T. C. Smith with a force of 263 men 
left his camp at the Umgazi,on the eastern frontier of Cape Colony, 
and marching overland reached Durban without opposition, and 
encamped, on the 4th of May, at the base of the Berea hills. 
The Boers, cut off from their port, called out a commando of some 
300 to 400 men under Andries Pretorius and gathered at Congella 
at the head of the bay. On the night of the 23rd of May Smith 
made an unsuccessful attack on the Boer camp, losing his guns 
and fifty men killed and wounded. On the 26th the Boers 
captured the harbour and settlement, and on the 31st blockaded 
the British camp, the women and children being removed, on the 
suggestion of Pretorius, to a ship in the harbour of which 'the 
Boers had taken possession. Meantime, an old Durban resident, 
Richard (commonly called Dick) King, had undertaken to convey 
tidings of the perilous position of the British force to the com- 
mandant at Graham's Town. He started on the night of the 
24th, and escaping the Boer outposts rode through the dense bush 
and across the bridgeless rivers of Kaffraria at peril of his life 
from hostile natives and wild beasts, and in nine days reached 
his destination — a distance of 360 m. in a direct line, and nearly 
600 by the route to be followed. This remarkable ride was 
accomplished with one change of mount, obtained from a mis- 
sionary in Pondoland. A comparatively strong force under 
Colonel A. J. Clocte was at once sent by sea to Port Natal, and on 
the 26th of June Captain Smith was relieved. The besieged had 
suffered greatly from lack of food. Within a fortnight Colonel 
Cloete had received the submission of the volksraad at Pieter- 
maritzburg. The burghers represented that they were under 
the protection of Holland, but this plea was peremptorily rejected 
by the commander of the British forces. 

The British government was still undecided as to its policy 
towards Natal. In April 1842 Lord Stanley (afterwards 14th 
earl of Derby), then secretary for the colonies in the second Peel 
Administration, wrote to Sir George Napier that the establishment 
of a colony in Natal would be attended with little prospect of 
advantage, but at the same time stated that the pretensions of 
the emigrants to be regarded as an independent community 
could not be admitted. Various measures were proposed which 
would but have aggravated the situation. Finally, in deference 
to the strongly urged views of Sir George Napier, Lord Stanley, 
in a despatch of the 13th of December, received in Cape Town 
on the 23rd of April 1843, consented to Natal becoming a 
British colony. The institutions adopted were to be as far as 
possible in accordance with the wishes of the people, but it was 
a fundamental condition " that there should not be in the eye of 
the law any distinction or disqualification whatever, founded 
on mere difference of colour, origin, language or creed." Sir 
George then appointed Mr Henry Cloete (a brother of Colonel 
Cloete) a special commissioner to explain to the Natal volksraad 
the decision of the government. There was a considerable party 
of Natal Boers still strongly opposed to the British, and they 
were reinforced by numerous bands of Boers who came over the 
Drakensberg from Winburg and Pot chef stroom. Commandant 
Jan Mocke of Winburg (who had helped to besiege Captain Smith 
at Durban) and others of the " war party " attempted to induce 
the volksraad not to submit, and a plan was formed to murder 
Pretorius, Boshof and other leaders, who were now convinced 
that the only chance of ending the state of complete anarchy 
into which the country had fallen was by accepting British 
sovereignty. In these circumstances the task of Mr Henry 
Cloete was one of great difficulty and delicacy. He behaved with 
the utmost tact and got rid of the Winburg and Potchefstroom 
burghers by declaring that he should recommend the Drakensberg 
as the northern limit of Natal. On the 8th of August 1843 
Natal the Natal volksraad unanimously agreed to the terms 

	annexed fcrOrea*

proposed by Lord Stanley. Many of the Boers who 
would not acknowledge British rule trekked once 
more over the mountains into what are now the Orange 
Free State and Transvaal provinces. At the end of 1843 there 
were not more than 500 Dutch families left in Natal. Cloete, 
before returning to the Cape, visited Panda and obtained from 
him a valuable concession. Hitherto the Tugela from source to 
mouth had been the recognized frontier between Natal and 
Zululand. Panda gave up to Natal all the territory between 
the Buffalo and Tugela rivers, now forming Klip River county. 

Although proclaimed a British colony in 1843, and in 1844 
declared a part of Cape Colony, it was not until the end of 1845 
that an effective administration was installed with Mr Martin 
West as lieutenant-governor, and the power of the volksraad 
finally came to an end. In that year the external trade of Natal, 
almost entirely with Cape Colony, was of the total value of 
£42,000 — of which £32,000 represented imported goods. 

The new administration found it hard to please the Dutch 
farmers, who among other grievances resented what they con- 
sidered the undue favour shown to the Kaffirs, whose numbers 
had been greatly augmented by the flight of refugees from Panda. 
In 1843, f° r instance, no fewer than 50,000 Zulus crossed the 
Tugela seeking the protection of the white man. The natives 
were settled in 1846 in specially selected locations and placed 
under the general supervision of Sir (then Mr) Theophilus Shep- 
stone (q.v.). Sir Harry Smith, newly appointed governor of the 
Cape, met, on the banks of the upper Tugela, a body of farmers 
preparing to recross the Drakensberg, and by remedying their 
grievances induced many of them to remain in Natal. Andries 
Pretorius and others, however, declined to remain, and from this 
time Pietorius (q.v.) ceased his connexion with Natal. Although 
by this migration the white population was again considerably 
reduced, those who remained were contented and loyal, and 
through the arrival of 4500 emigrants from England in the years 
1848-1851 and by subsequent immigration from oversea the 
colony became overwhelmingly British in character. From the 
time of the coming of the first considerable body of British 
settlers dates the development of trade and agriculture in the 
colony, followed somewhat later by the exploitation of the 
mineral resources of the country. At the same time schools were 
established and various churches began or increased their work 
in the colony. Dr Colenso, appointed bishop of Natal, arrived in 
1854. In 1856 the dependence of the country on Cape Colony was 
put to an end and Natal constituted a distinct colony with a 
legislative council of sixteen members, twelve" elected by the 
inhabitants and four nominated by the crown. At the time the 
white population exceeded 8000. While dependent on the Cape, 
ordinances had been passed establishing Roman-Dutch law as 
the law of Natal, and save where modified by legislation it 
remained in force. . 

The British settlers soon realized that the coast lands were 
suited to the cultivation of tropical or semi-tropical products, and 
from 1852 onward sugar, coffee, cotton and arrow-root Indian 
were introduced, tea being afterwards .substituted for coolies 
coffee. The sugar industry soon became of importance, l f tr0 j 
and the planters were compelled to seek for large numbers 
of labourers. The natives, at ease in their locations, did not 
volunteer in sufficient numbers, and recourse was had to coolie 
labour from India. The first coolies reached Natal in i860. They 
came under indentures, but at the expiration of their contract 
were allowed to settle in the colony. 1 This proved one of the 
most momentous steps taken in the history of South Africa, for 
the Indian population rapidly increased, the " free " Indians be- 
coming market gardeners, farmers, hawkers, traders, and in time 
serious competitors with the whites. But in i860 and for many 
years afterwards these consequences were not foreseen, and alone 
among the South Africa states Natal offered a welcome to Asiatics. 

In 1866 the borders of the colony were extended on the south- 
west by the annexation of part of Kaffraria that had formerly 
been under the sway of the Pondo chief Faku, who 
found himself unable to maintain his authority in Ke * te 
a region occupied by many diverse tribes. The newly awards. 
acquired territory was named Alfred county in memory 
of a visit paid to Natal by Prince Alfred (afterwards duke of 
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha). In 1867 R. W. Keate (1814-1873) became 
lieutenant-governor, a post which he filled until 1872. His 
administration is notable, not so much for internal affairs but 
from the fact that he twice acted as arbitrator in disputes in 
which the Boer states were involved. In a dispute between the 
Transvaal and the Orange Free State he decided (February 1870) 
that the Klip river and not the upper Vaal was the frontier 
stream. A more famous decision, that known as the Keate 
Award, was given in October 1871. It concerned the south- 
western frontiers of the Transvaal, and the award, which was 
against the Transvaal pretensions, had important effects on 
the history of South Africa (see Transvaal and South Africa). 

During all this time little was done to alter the condition of 
the natives. There was scarcely an attempt to copy the policy, 
deliberately adopted in Cape Colony, of educating and civilizing 
the black man. Neither was Natal faced with the Cape problem 
of a large half-caste population. The Natal natives were left 
very much in the state in which they were before the advent of 
the white men. While this opportunity of educating and training 
a docile people was in the main neglected, savage abuse of power 
by their chiefs was prevented. Under the superintendence 
of Shepstone the original refugees were quiet and contented, 
enjoying security from injustice and considerable freedom. 
This ideal lot, from the native point of view, drew such numbers 
of immigrants from disturbed districts that with the natural 
increase of population in thirty years the native inhabitants 
increased from about 100,000 to fully 350,000. New generations 
grew up almost as ignorant as their fathers, but not with the 
same sense of dependence upon the white men. In this way was 
sown the seed of future trouble between the two races. The 
first serious collision between the natives and the government 
occurred in 1873. The Amahlubi, one of the highest in rank 
of the Bantu tribes of South Africa, fleeing from the cruelties of 

	1 Between i860 and 1866 some 5000 Indians entered the colony. 
	Immigration then ceased, and was not resumed until 1874. By that j 
	year the natives from Portuguese territory and elsewhere who had 
	Found employment in Natal had been attracted to the Kimbcrley 
	diamond mines, and the Natal natives not coming forward (save under 
	compulsion), the importation of Indian coolies was again permitted 
	(see the Natal Blue Book, Report of the Indian Immigration Com- 
	mission, 1909). 

Panda, had been located by the Natal government under their 
chief Langalibalele (i.e. the great sun which shines and burns) 
in 1848 at the foot of the Drakensberg with the object of prevent- 
ing the Bushmen who dwelt in the mountains plundering the 
upland farmers. Here the Amahlubi prospered, and after the 
diamond fields had been discovered many of the young men 
who had been to Kimberley brought back firearms. These 
Langalibalele refused to register, and entered into negotiations 
with several tribes with the object of organizing a general revolt. 
Prompt action by Sir Benjamin Pine, then lieutenant-governor 
of the colony, together with help from the Cape and 
bSefc'a Basutoland, prevented the success of Langalibalele's 
rebellion, plan, and his own tribe, numbering some 10,000 persons, 
was the only one which rebelled. The chief was 
captured, and exiled to Cape Colony (August 1874). Permitted 
to return to Natal in 1886, he died in 1889. 

This rebellion drew the attention of the home government to 
the native question in Natal. The colonists, if mistaken in 
their general policy of leaving the natives in a condition of 
mitigated barbarism, had behaved towards them with uniform 
kindness and justice. They showed indeed in their dealings both 
with the natives within their borders and with the Zulus beyond 
the Tugela a disposition to favour the natives at the expense 
of their white neighbours in the Transvaal and Orange Free 
State, and their action against Langalibalele was fully justified 
and the danger of a widespread native revolt real. But there 
were those, including Bishop Colenso, who thought the treatment 
of the Amahlubi wrong, and their agitation induced the British 
government to recall Sir Benjamin Pine, Sir Garnet Wolseley 
being sent out as temporary governor. Sir Garnet reported 
the natives as " happy and prosperous — well off in every sense." 
As a result of consultations with Shepstone certain modifications 
were made in native policy, chiefly in the direction of more 
European supervision. 

Meantime the colony had weathered a severe commercial 
crisis brought on in 1865 through over-speculation and the 
neglect of agriculture, save along the coast belt. But 
Colenso tne tra( ^ e over berg largely developed on the dis- 
affain covery of the Kimberley diamond mines, and the 
progress of the country was greatly promoted by the 
substitution of the railway for the ox wagon as a means of 
transport. There already existed a short line from the Point 
at Durban to the Umgeni, and on the 1st of January 1876 Sir 
Henry Bulwer, who had succeeded Wolseley as governor, turned 
the first sod of a new state-owned railway which was completed 
as far as Maritzburg in 1880. At this date the white inhabitants 
numbered ahout 20,000. But besides a commercial crisis the 
colony had been the scene of an ecclesiastical dispute which 
attracted widespread attention. Bishop Colenso (q. v.), condemned 
in 1863 on a charge of heresy, ignored the authority of the court 
of South African bishops and was maintained in his position by 
decision of the Privy Council in England. This led to a division 
among the Anglican community in the colony and the consecra- 
tion in 1869 of a rival bishop, who took the title of bishop of 
Maritzburg. Colenso's bold advocacy of the cause of the natives 
— which he maintained with vigour until his death (in 1883) — 
attracted almost equal attention. His native name was Usobantu 
{father of tlte people). 

For some years Natal, in common with the other countries of 
South Africa, had suffered from the absence of anything resem- 
bling a strong government among the Boers of the Transvaal, 
neighbours of Natal on the north. The annexation of the 
Transvaal to Great Britain, effected by Sir Theophilus Shepstone 
in April 1877, would, it was hoped, put a period to the disorders 
in that country. But the new administration at Pretoria in- 
herited many disputes with the Zulus, disputes which were in 
large measure the cause of the war of 1879. For years the 
Zulus had lived at amity with the Natalians, from whom they 
received substantial favours, and in 1872 Cetywayo (q.v.) f 
on succeeding his father Panda, had given assurances of good 
behaviour. These promises were not kept for long, and by 1878 
his attitude had become so hostile towards both the Natal and 
Transvaal governments that Sir Bartle Frere, then High Com- 
missioner for South Africa, determined on his reduction. During 
the war (see Zululand) Natal was used as the British base, 
and the Natal volunteers rendered valuable service in the 
campaign, which, after opening with disasters to the British 
forces, ended in the breaking of the Zulu power. (F. R. C.) 

Scarcely had the colony recovered from the shock of the 
Zulu War than it was involved in the revolt of the Transvaal 
Boers (1880-1881), an event which overshadowed all satal 
domestic concerns. The Natalians were intensely ***d the 
British in sentiment, and resented deeply the policy YxxthJit 
adopted by the Gladstone administration. At In- 
gogo, Majuba and Laing's Nek, all of them situated within 
the colony, British forces had been defeated by the Boers. 
And the treaty of retrocession was never regarded in Natal as 
anything but a surrender. It was clearly understood that the 
Boers would aim to establish a republican government over the 
whole of South Africa, and that the terms of peace simply meant 
greater bloodshed at no distant date. The protest made by 
the Natalians against the settlement was in vain. The Transvaal 
Republic was established, but the prediction of the colonists, 
ignored at the time, was afterwards fulfilled to the letter. In 
justice, however, to the colonists of Natal it must be recorded 
that, finding their protest with regard to the Transvaal settle- 
ment useless, they made up their minds to shape their policy 
in conformity with that settlement. But it was not long before 
their worst fears with regard to the Boers began to be realized, 
and their patience was once more severely taxed. The Zulu 
power, as has been recorded, was broken in 1879. After the 
war quarrels arose among the petty chiefs set up by Sir Garnet 
Wolseley, and in 1883 some Transvaal Boers intervened, and 
subsequently, as a reward for the assistance they had rendered 
to one of the combatants, demanded and annexed 8000 sq. m. 
of country, which they styled the " New Republic." As the 
London Convention had stipulated that there should be no 
trespassing on the part of the Boers over their specified boundaries, 
and as Natal had been the basis for those operations against 
the Zulus on the part of the British in 1879, which alone made 
such an annexation of territory possible, a strong feeling was 
once more aroused in Natal. The " New Republic," reduced in 
area, however, to less than 2000 sq. m., was nevertheless recog- 
nized by the British government in 1886, and in 1888 its consent 
was given to the territory (the Vryheid district) being incor- 
porated with the TransvaaL Meantime, in 1887, the remainder 
of Zululand had been annexed to Great Britain (see Zululand). 

In 1884 the discovery of gold in De Kaap Valley, and on 
Mr Moodie's farm in the Transvaal, caused a considerable rush 
of colonists from Natal to that country. Railways were still 
far from the Transvaal border, and Natal not only sent her own 
colonists to the new fields, but also offered the nearest route for 
prospectors from Cape Colony or from Europe. Durban was 
soon thronged; and Pietermaritzburg, which was then practi- 
cally the terminus of the Natal railway, was the base from which 
nearly all the expeditions to the goldfields were fitted out. 
The journey to De Kaap by bullock-waggon occupied about 
six weeks. " Kurveying " (the conducting of transport by 
bullock-waggon) in itself constituted a great industry. Two 
years later, in 1886, the Rand goldfields were proclaimed, and 
the tide of trade which had already set in with the 
Transvaal steadily increased. Natal colonists were Q ™ w 
not merely the first in the field with the transport industries. 
traffic to the new goldfields; they became some of 
the earliest proprietors of mines, and for several years many of 
the largest mining companies had their chief offices at Pieter- 
maritzburg or Durban. In this year (1886) the railway reached 
Ladysmith, and in 1891 it was completed to the Transvaal 
frontier at Charlestown, the section from Ladysmith northward 
opening up the Dundee and Newcastle coalfields. Thus a new 
industry was added to the resources of the colony. 

The demand which the growing trade made upon the one 
port of Natal, Durban, encouraged the colonists to redouble 
their efforts to improve their harbour. The question of a fairway 
from ocean to harbour has been a difficult one at nearly every 
port on the African coast. A heavy sea from the Indian Ocean 
is always breaking on the shore, even in the finest weather, 
and at the mouth of every natural harbour a bar occurs. To 
deepen the channel over the bar at Durban so that steamers 
might enter the harbour was the cause of labour and expenditure 
for many years. Harbour works were begun in 1857, piers and 
jetties were constructed, dredgers imported, and controversy 
raged over the various schemes for harbour improvement. In 
1 88 1 a harbour board was formed under the chairmanship of 
Mr Harry Escombe. It controlled the operations for improving 
the sea entrance until 1893, when on the establishment of re- 
sponsible government it was abolished. The work of improving 
the harbour was however continued with vigour, and finally, in 
1904, such success w T as achieved that vessels of the largest class 
were enabled to enter port (see Durban). At the same time 
the railway system was continually developing. 

	Self-
	govern-
	ment

For many years there had been an agitation among the 
colonists for self-government. In 1882 the colony was offered 
self-government coupled with the obligations of 
self-defence. The offer was declined, but in 1883 the 
legislative council was remodelled so as to consist of 

granted, 23 elected and 7 nominated members. In 1890 
the elections to the council led to the return of a majority in 
favour of accepting self-government, and in 1893 a bill in favour 
of the proposed change was passed and received the sanction 
of the Imperial government. At the time the white inhabitants 
numbered about 50,000. The electoral law was framed to 
prevent more than a very few natives obtaining the franchise. 
Restrictions in this direction dated as far back as 1865, while in 
1896 an act was passed aimed at the exclusion of Indians from 
the suffrage. The leader of the party which sought responsible 
government was Sir John Robinson (1 830-1903) who "had gone 
to Natal in 1850, was a leading journalist in the colony, had 
been a member of the legislative council since 1863, and had 
filled various official positions. He now became the first premier 
and colonial secretary with Mr Harry Escombe (q.v.) as attorney- 
general and Mr F. R. Moor as secretary for Native Affairs. The 
year that witnessed this change in the constitution was also 
notable for the death of Sir Theophilus Shepstonc, Natal's 
most prominent citizen. In the same year Sir Walter Hely- 
Hutchinson became governor. His immediate predecessors 
had been Sir Charles Mitchell (1880-1893) and Sir Arthur 
Havelock (1 886-1 889). Sir John Robinson remained premier 
until 1897, a year marked by the annexation of Zululand to 
Natal. In the following year Natal entered the Customs Union 
already existing between Cape Colony and the Orange Free 
State. Sir John Robinson had been succeeded as premier by 
Mr Harry Escombe (February-October 1897) and Escombe 
by Sir Henry Binns, on whose death in June 1899 Licut.-Colonel 
(afterwards Sir) Albert Hime formed a ministry which remained 
in office until after the conclusion of the Anglo-Boer War. Mean- 
time (in 1 901) Sir Henry McCallum had succeeded Sir Walter 
Hely-Hutchinson as governor. 

For some years Natal had watched with anxiety the attitude 
of increasing hostility towards the British adopted by the 
Pretoria administration, and, with bitter remembrance of the 
events of 1881, gauged with accuracy the intentions of the Boers. 
So suspicious had the ministry become of the nature of the 
military preparations that were being made by the Boers, that 
in May 1899 they communicated their apprehensions to the 
High Commissioner, Sir Alfred Milner, who telegraphed on the 
25th of May to Mr Chamberlain, informing him that Natal was 
uneasy. The governor expressed his views to the prime minister 
that the Natal government ought to give the British government 
every support, and Colonel Hime replied that their support 

would be given, but at the same time he feared the 
If!899- r consec l ucnces to Natal if, after all, the British govern- 
1902. ment should draw back. In July the Natal ministry 
learnt that it was not the intention of the Imperial 
government to endeavour to hold the frontier in case hostilities 
arose, but that a line of defence considerably south of the frontier 
would be taken up. This led to a request on their part that if 
the Imperial government had any reason to anticipate the 
breakdown of negotiations, " such steps may be at once taken 
as may be necessary for the effectual defence of the whole 
colony." Sir William Pcnn Symons, the general commanding 
the British forces in Natal in September, decided to hold Glencoe. 
On the arrival of Lieut. -General Sir George White from India, 
he informed the governor that he considered it dangerous to 
attempt to hold Glencoe, and urged the advisability of with- 
drawing the troops to Ladysmith. The governor was strongly 
opposed to this step, as he was anxious to protect the coal supply, 
and also feared the moral effect of a withdrawal. Eventually 
Sir Archibald Hunter, then chief of staff to Sir Redvers Bullcr, 
was consulted, and stated that in his opinion, Glencoe being 
already occupied, " it was a case of balancing drawbacks, and 
advised that, under the circumstances, the troops be retained 
at Glencoe." This course was then adopted. 

On the nth of October 1899 war broke out. The first act was 
the seizure by the Boers of a Natal train on the Free State border. 
On the 1 2th Laing's Nek was occupied by the Boer forces, who 
were moved in considerable force over the Natal border. New- 
castle was next occupied by the Boers unopposed, and on the 
20th of October occurred the battle of Talana Hill outside 
Dundee. In this engagement the advanced body of British 
troops, 3000 strong, under Symons, held a camp called Craigside 
which lay between Glencoe and Dundee, and from this position 
General Symons hoped to be able to hold the northern portion 
of Natal. There is no doubt that this policy strongly 
commended itself to the governor and ministers of Natal, 
and that they exercised considerable pressure to have it 
adopted. But from a military point of view it was not at all 
cordially approved by Sir George White, and it was after- 
wards condemned by Lord Roberts. Fortunately Symons was 
able to win a complete victory over one of the Boer columns at 
Talana Hill. He himself received a mortal wound in the action. 
Brigadier-General Yule then took command, and an overwhelm- 
ing force of Boers rendering the further occupation of Dundee 
dangerous, he decided to retire his force to Ladysmith. On the 
21st of October General Sir George White and General (Sir John) 
French defeated at Elandslaagte a strong force of Boers, who 
threatened to cut off General Yule's retreat. He again attacked 
the Boer forces at Rietfontein on the 24th of October, and. on 
the 26th General Yule reached Ladysmith in safety. Ladysmith 
now became for a time the centre of military interest. The Boers 
gradually surrounded the town and cut off the communications 
from the south. Various engagements were fought in the 
attempt to prevent this movement, including the actions of 
Farquhar's Farm and Nicholson's Nek on the 30th (see Trans- 
vaal). The investment of Ladysmith continued till the 28th of 
February 1900, when, after various attempts to relieve the 
beleaguered garrison, Sir Redvers Buller's forces at last entered 
the town. During the six weeks previous to the relief, 200 
deaths had occurred from disease alone, and altogether as many 
as 8424 were reported to have passed through the hospitals. 
The relief of Ladysmith soon led to the evacuation of Natal by 
the Boer forces, who trekked northwards. 

During the Boer invasion the government and the loyal 
colonists, constituting the great majority of the inhabitants of 
the colony, rendered the Imperial forces every assistance. A 
comparatively small number of the Dutch colonists joined the 
enemy, but there was no general rebellion among them. As the 
war progressed the Natal volunteers and other Natal forces took 
a prominent part. The Imperial Light Horse and other irregular 
corps were recruited in Natal, although the bulk of the men in 
the forces were Uitlanders from Johannesburg. As the nearest 
colony to the Transvaal, Natal was resorted to by alargenumber 
of men, women and children, who were compelled to leave the 
Transvaal on the outbreak of the war. Refugee and Uitlander 
committees were formed both at Durban and Maritzburg, and, 
in conjunction with the colonists, they did all in their power to 
assist in recruiting irregular corps, and also in furnishing relief 
to the sick and needy. 

As one result of the war, an addition was made to the territory 
comprised in Natal, consisting of a portion of what had previously 
been included in the Transvaal. The Natal government origin- 
ally made two proposals for annexing new territory: — 

1. It was proposed that the following districts should be trans- 
ferred to Natal, viz. the district of Vryheid, the district of Utrecht 
and such portion of the district of Wakkerstroom as was comprised 
by a line drawn from the north-eastern corner of Natal, east by 
Volksrust in a northerly direction to the summit of the Drakensberg 
Range, along that range, passing just north of the town of Wakker- 
stroom, to the head waters of the Pongola river, and thence follow- 
ing the Pongola river to the border of the Utrecht district. In 
consideration of the advantage to Natal from this addition of terri- 
tory, Natal should take over £700,000 of the Transvaal debt. 

2. It was proposed to include in Natal such portions of theHarri- 
smith and Vrede districts as were comprised by a line following the 

Elands river north from its source on the Basutoland 
*/*/*" border to its junction with the Wilge river, and thence 
th0 S ° drawn straight to the point where the boundaries of Natal, 
.. the Transvaal and the Orange River Colony meet on the 

frrtt'rf 11 Drakensberg. In consideration of this addition to her 
es. terr i torVj N a tal should take over a portion of the Orange 
River Colony debt, to be raised at the end of the war, to the amount 
of £200,000. 

The Imperial government decided to sanction only the first 
of these two proposals. For this course there were many reasons, 
the Transvaal territory annexed, or the greater part of it (the 
Vryheid district), having been only separated from the rest of 
Zululand in 1883 by a raid of armed Boers. " In handing over 
this district to the administration which controls the rest of 
Zululand, His Majesty's government," wrote Mr Chamberlain, 
under date March 1902, " feel that they are reuniting what ought 
never to have been separated." 

With regard, however, to the proposed transfer of territory 
from the Orange River Colony, the circumstances were different. 
" There is," said Mr Chamberlain, " no such historical reason 
as exists in the case of Vryheid for making the transfer. On the 
contrary, the districts in question have invariably formed part 
of the state from which it is now proposed to sever them, and 
they are separated from Natal by mountains which form a well- 
defined natural boundary. In these circumstances, His Majesty's 
government have decided to confine the territory to be trans- 
ferred to the districts in the Transvaal." 

The districts added to Natal contained about 6000 white 
inhabitants (mostly Dutch), and some 92,000 natives, and had 
an area of nearly 7000 sq. m., so that this annexation meant an 
addition to the white population of Natal of about one-tenth, 
to her native population of about one-tenth also, and to her 
territory of about one-fourth. An act authorizing the annexation 
was passed during 1902 and the territories were formally trans- 
ferred to Natal in January 1903. (A. P. H.; F. R. C.) 

The period following the war was succeeded by commercial 
depression, though in Natal it was not so severely felt as in other 
states of South Africa. The government met the crisis 
menial by renewed energy in harbour works, railway construc- 
depressioa tions and the development of the natural resources 
And of the country. A railway to the Zululand coalfields 

ItbeUlon was com Pl ete< i * n I 9°3> an d in the same year a line 
was opened to Vryheid in the newly annexed territories. 
Natal further built several railway lines in the eastern half of 
the Orange River Colony, thus opening up new markets for her 
produce and facilitating her transit trade. Mr Chamberlain on 
his visit to South Africa came first to Natal, where he landed in 
the last days of 1902, and conferred with the leading colonists. 
In August 1903 the Hime ministry resigned and was succeeded 
by a cabinet under the premiership of Mr (afterwards Sir) George 
Sutton, the founder of the wattle industry in Natal and one of 
the pioneers in the coal-mining industry. In May 1905 Sir 
George Sutton was replaced by a coalition ministry under Mr 
C. J. Smythe, who had been colonial secretary under Sir Albert 
Hime. These somewhat frequent changes of ministry, char- 
acteristic of a country new to responsible government, reflected, 
chiefly, differences concerning the treatment of commercial 
questions and the policy to be adopted towards the natives. 
Towards those Dutch colonists who had joined the enemy 
during the war leniency was shown, all rebels being pardoned. 

The attitude of the natives both in Natal proper and in Zululand 
caused much disquiet. As early as July 1903 rumours were 
current that Dinizulu (a sOn of Cetywayo) was disaffected and 
the power he exercised as representative of the former royal house 
rendered his attitude a matter of great moment. Dinizulu, 
however, remained at the time quiescent, though the Zulus were 
in a state of excitement over incidents connected with the war, 
when they had been subject to raids by Boer commandoes, and 
on one occasion at least had retaliated in characteristic Zulu 
fashion. Unrest was also manifested among the natives west of 
the Tugela, but it was not at first cause for alarm. The chief 
concern of the Natal government was to remodel their native 
policy where it proved inadequate, especially in view of the 
growth of the movement for the federation of the South African 
colonies. During 1903-1904 a Native Affairs' Commission, 
representative of all the states, obtained much evidence on the 
status and conditions of the natives. Its investigations pointed 
to the loosening of tribal ties and to the corresponding growth 
of a spirit of individual independence. Among its recommenda- 
tions was the direct political representation of natives in the 
colonial legislatures on the New Zealand model, and the imposi- 
tion of direct taxation upon natives, which should not be less 
than £1 a year payable by every adult male. The commission 
also called attention to the numerical insufficiency of magistrates 
and native commissioners in certain parts of Natal. With some 
of the recommendations the Natal commissioners disagreed; 
in 1905, however, an act was passed by the Natal legislature 
imposing a poll-tax of £1 on all males over 18 in the colony, 
except indentured Indians and natives paying hut-tax (which 
was 14s. a year). Every European was bound to pay the tax. 
In 1906 a serious rebellion broke out in the colony, attributable 
ostensibly to the poll-tax, and spread to Zululand. It was 
suppressed by the colonial forces under Colonel (afterwards Sir) 
Duncan McKenzie, aided by a detachment of Transvaal 
volunteers. An incident which marked the beginning of this 
rebellion brought the Natal ministry into sharp conflict with 
the Imperial government (the Campbell-Bannerman administra- 
tion). Early in the year a farmer who had insisted that the 
Kaffirs on his farm should pay the poll-tax was murdered, and on 
the 8th of February some forty natives in the Richmond district 
forcibly resisted the collection of the tax and killed a sub- 
inspector of police and a trooper at Byrnetown. Two of the 
natives implicated were court-martialled and shot (February 1 5) ; 
others were subsequently arrested and tried by court martial. 
Nineteen were sentenced to death, but in the case of seven of the 
prisoners the sentence was commuted. On the day before that 
fixed for the execution Lord Elgin, then Secretary of c _.. 
State for the Colonies, intervened and directed the w uh the 
governor to postpone the execution of the sentence, home 
Thereupon the Natal ministry resigned, giving as their x° ven " 
reason the importance of mamtaining the authority of mea * 
the colonial administration at a critical period, and the con- 
stitutional question involved in the interference by the imperial 
authorities in the domestic affairs of a self-governing colony. 
The action of the British cabinet caused both astonishment and 
indignation throughout South Africa and in the other self- 
governing states of the empire. After a day's delay, during which 
Sir Henry McCallum reiterated his concurrence, already made 
known in London, in the justice of the sentence passed on the 
natives, Lord Elgin gave way (March 30). The Natal ministry 
thereupon remained in office. The guilty natives were shot on 
the 2nd of April. 1 It was at this time that Bambaata, a chief 
in the Greytown district who had been deposed for misconduct, 
kidnapped the regent appointed in his stead. He was pursued 
and escaped to Zululand, -where he received considerable help. 
He was killed in battle in June, and by the close of July the 
rebellion was at an end. As has been stated, it was ostensibly 
attributable to the poll-tax, but the causes were more deep- 
seated. Though somewhat obscure they may be found in the 

	1 Subsequently three other natives, after trial by the supreme 
	court, were condemned and executed for their share in the Byrne- 
	town murders. 

growing sense of power and solidarity among all the Kaffir 
tribes of South Africa — a sense which gave force to the " Ethio- 
pian movement," which, ecclesiastical in origin, was political 
in its development. There were moreover special local causes 
such as undoubted defects in the Natal administration. 1 Those 
Africans whose " nationalism " was greatest looked to Dinizulu 
as their leader, and he was accused by many colonists of having 
incited the rebellion. Dinizulu protested his loyalty to the 
British, nor was it likely that he viewed with approval the action 
of Bambaata, a comparatively unimportant and meddlesome 
chief. As time went on, however, the Natal government, 
alarmed at a series of murders of whites in Zululand and at the 
evidences of continued unrest among the natives, became con- 
vinced that Dinizulu was implicated in the rebellious movement. 
When a young man, in 1889, he had been convicted of high 
treason and had been exiled, but afterwards (in 1897) allowed to 
return. Now a force under Sir Duncan McKenzie entered 
Zululand. Thereupon Dinizulu surrendered (December 1907) 
without opposition, and was removed to Maritzburg. His trial 
was delayed until November 1908, and it was not until March 
1909 that judgment was given, the court finding him guilty only 
on the minor charge of harbouring rebels. Meantime, in February 
1908, the governor — Sir Matthew Nathan, who had succeeded 
Sir Henry McCallum in August 1907 — had made a tour in 
Zululand, on which occasion some 1500 of the prisoners taken 
in the rebellion of 1906 were released. 

The intercolonial commission had dealt with the native 
question as it affected South Africa as a whole; it was felt that 
Native a more local investigation was needed, and in August 
Affairs 9 1906 a strong commission was appointed to inquire 
Com ' into the condition of the Natal natives. The general 
m ss on, e i ec tion which was held in theiollowing month turned 
on native policy and on the measures necessary to meet the 
commercial depression. The election, which witnessed the return 
of four Labour members, 'resulted in a ministerial majority of a 
somewhat heterogeneous character, and in November 1966 Mr 
Smythe resigned, being succeeded by Mr F. R. Moor, who in 
his election campaign had criticized the Smythe ministry for 
their financial proposals and for the " theatrical " manner in 
which they had conducted their conflict with the home govern- 
ment. Mr Moor remained premier until the office was abolished 
by the establishment of the Union of South Africa. In August 
1007 the report of the Native Affairs' Commission was published. 
The commission declared that the chasm between the native 
and white races had been broadening for years and that the 
efforts of the administration — especially since the grant of 
responsible government — to reconcile the Kaffirs to the changed 
conditions of rule and policy and to convert them into an element 
of strength had been ineffective. It was not sufficient to secure 
them, as the government had done, peace and ample means of 
livelihood. The commission among other proposals for a more 
liberal and sympathetic native policy urged the creation of a 
native advisory Board entrusted with very wide powers. " Per- 
sonal rule," they declared, " supplies the keynote of successful 
native control " — a statement amply borne out by the influence 
over the natives exercised by Sir T. Shepstone. The unrest in 
Zululand delayed action being taken on the commission's report. 
But in 1909 an act was passed which placed native affairs in the 
hands of four district commissioners, gave to the minister for 
native affairs direct executive authority and created a council 
for native affairs on which non-official members had seats. 
While the district commissioners were intended 'to keep in close 
touch with the natives, the council was to act as a " deliberative, 
consultative and advisory body." 

Concurrently with the efforts made to reorganize their native 
policy the colony also endeavoured to deal with the Asiatic 
question. The rapid growth of the Indian population from 
about 1890 caused much disquiet among the majority of the 
white inhabitants, who viewed with especial anxiety the activities 

	1 The causes, both local and general, are set forth in a despatch 
	by the governor of the 21st of June 1906 and printed in the Blue 
	Book, Cd. 3247. 

of the " free," i.e. unindentured Indians. An act of 1895, which 
did not become effective until 1901, imposed an annual tax of £3 
on time-expired Indians who remained in the colony 
and did not reindenture. In 1897 an Indian a£nsoii 
Immigration Restriction Act was passed with the Indians. 
object of protecting European traders ; in 1 903 
another Immigration Restriction Act among other things, per- 
mitted the exclusion of all would-be immigrants unable to write 
in the characters of some European language. Under this act 
thousands of Asiatics were refused permission to land. In 1906 
municipal disabilities were imposed upon Asiatics, and in 1907 
a Dealers' Licences Act was passed with the object, and effect, 
of restricting the trading operations of Indians. In 1908 the 
government introduced a bill to provide for the cessation of 
Indian emigration at the end of three years; it was not pro- 
ceeded with, but a strong commission was appointed to inquire 
into the whole subject. This commission reported in 1909, its 
general conclusion being that in the interests of Natal the 
importation of indentured Indian labour should not be dis- 
continued. For sugar, tea and wattle growing, farming, coal- 
mining and other industries indentured Indian labour appeared 
to be essential. B ut the evidence was practically unanimous that 
the Indian was undesirable in Natal other than as a labourer 
and the commission recommended compulsory repatriation. 
While desirous that steps should be taken to prevent an increase 
in the number of free Asiatic colonists, the commission pointed 
out that there were in Natal over 60,000 " free " Indians whose 
rights could not be interfered with by legislation dealing with the 
further importation of coolies. But these Indians by reindentur- 
ing might come under the operation of the repatriation proposal. 
Nothing further was done in Natal up to the establishment of 
the Union of South Africa, when all questions specially or 
differentially affecting Asiatics were withdrawn from the com- 
petence of the provincial authorities. 

Not long after the conclusion of the war of 1899-1902 the 
close commercial relations between the Transvaal and Natal 
led to suggestions for a union of the two colonies, but 
these suggestions were not seriously entertained. The 

	The move 
	ment tor 

divergent interests of the various colonies threatened union, 
indeed a tariff and railway war when the Customs 
Convention (provisionally renewed in March 1906) should 
expire in 1908. But at the close of 1906 the Cape ministry formally 
reopened the question of federation, and at a railway con- 
ference held in Pretoria in May 1908 the Natal delegates 
agreed to a motion affirming the desirability of the early union 
of the self-governing colonies. The movement for union rapidly 
gained strength, and a National Convention to consider the 
matter met in Durban in October 1908. In Natal, especially 
among the older colonists, who feared that in a united South 
Africa Natal interests would be overborne, the proposals for 
union were met with suspicion and opposition, and the Natal 
ministry felt bound to submit the question to the people. A 
referendum act was passed in April 1909, and in June following 
the electors by 11,121 votes to 3701 decided to join the Union. 
(See South Africa.) 

Natal was concerned not only with the political aspects of 
union, and with its natives and Indian problems, but had to 
safeguard its commercial interests and to deal with a revenue 
insufficient for its needs. In 1908 an Income Tax and a Land 
Tax Act was passed; the land tax being a halfpenny in the £ 
" on the aggregate unimproved value " — it brought in £30,000 
in 1 908-1909. Meantime it was agreed by the Cape, Transvaal 
and Natal governments that, subject to Natal entering the 
Union, its share of the Rand import trade should be 25% before 
and 30% after the establishment of the Union. Previously 
Natal had only 22^% of the traffic, and this agreement led to a 
revival in trade. Moreover, the development of its coal-mines 
and agriculture was vigorously prosecuted, and in 19 10 it was 
found possible to abolish both the Income Tax and Land Tax 
and yet have a surplus in revenue. The closing months of 
Natal's existence as a separate colony thus found her peaceful 
and prosperous. The governor, Sir Matthew Nathan, had 
returned to England in December 1909, and Lord Methuen was 
governor from that time until the 31st of May 1910. On that 
date the Union of South Africa was established, Natal becoming 
one of the original provinces of the Union. 

Bibliography. — R. Russell, The Garden Colony, The Story of 
Natal and its Neighbours (London, 1910 ed.) ( a good general account; 
H. Brooks (edited by R. J. Mann), Natal, a History and Description 
of the Colony, &c. (London, 1876); J. F. Ingram, Natalia, a Con- 
densed History of the Exploration and Colonization of Natal and 
Zululand (London, 1897); C. P. Lucas, Historical Geography of the 
British Colonies , vol. iv. " South and East Africa " (Oxford, 1897), 
also general surveys. _ Twentieth- Century Impressions of Natal 
(London, 1006) deals with the peoples, commerce, industries and 
resources of the colony; the Census of the Colony of Natal, April 
1004 (Maritzburg, 1905) contains a large amount of authoritative 
information ; The Natal Almanac is a directory and yearly register 
published at Maritzburg. See also the official Statistical Year Book, 
For the native inhabitants, besidesthe works quoted under Kaffirs, 
valuable information will be found in Native Customs, H.C. 292 (1881 ), 
the Report of the Native Affairs' Commission, 1006-1007, Cd. 3889 
(1908); the Report of the South African Native Affairs 1 Commission, 
1003-100$, Cd. 2399 (1905); and other parliamentary papers 
(consult The Colonial Office List, London, yearly). 

For detailed historical study consult G. M. Theal, History of South 
Africa, 1834-1854 (London, 1893), with notes on early books on 
Natal. Among these the most valuable are: N. Isaacs, Travels and 
Adventures in Eastern Africa . . . with a Sketch of Natal (2 vols., 
London, 1836); H. Cloete, Emigration of the Dutch Farmers from 
the Cape and their Settlement m Natal . . . (Cape Town, 1856), 
reprinted as The History of the Great Boer Trek (London, 1899), an 
authoritative record; J. C. Chase, Natal, a Reprint of all Authentic 
Notices, &c. (Grahamstown, 1843); W. C. Holden, History of the 
Colony of Natal (London, 1855); J. Bird, The Annals of Natal, 
140$ to 184$ (2 vols., Maritzburg, 1888), a work of permanent value, 
consisting of official records, &c. ; Shepstone, Historic Sketch of 
Natal (1864). See also South Africa Handbooks, useful reprints from 
the paper South Africa (London, N.D. [1900 et seq.]); Martineau's 
Life of Sir Bartle Frere, the A utobiography of Sir Harry Smith, and 
Sir J. Robinson's A Lifetime in South Africa (London, 1901) ; George 
Linton, or the First Years of an English. Colony (London, 1876). 
Bishop A. H. Baynes's Handbooks of English Church Expansion. 
South Africa (London, N.D. [1908]) gives the story of the Colenso 
controversy and its results. 

For further historical works and for information on flora, fauna, 
climate, law, church, &c. see the bibliography under South Africa. 
(See also Zululand : Bibliography.) (F. R. C.) 


NATAL, a city and port of Brazil and capital of the state of 
Rio Grande do Norte, on the right bank of the Rio Potengy, 
or Rio Grande do Norte, about 2 m. above its mouth. Pop. of 
the municipality (1890) 13,725. Natal is the starting-point of 
the Natal and Nova Cruz railway, and is a port of call for coast- 
wise steamers, which usually anchor outside the bar. It is a 
stagnant, poorly built town of one-storeyed houses and mud- 
walled cabins, with few public edifices and business houses of 
a better type. The only industry of note is the manufacture 
of cotton. The exports are chiefly sugar and cotton. Natal was 
founded in 1597 as a military post to check an illicit trade in 
Brazil-wood. In 1633 it was occupied by the Dutch, who 
remained tuitil 1654. It hecame the capital of a province in 
1820. In early works it is sometimes termed Cidade dos Reis 
(City of the Kings). 


NATANZ, a minor province of Persia, situated in the hilly 
district between Isfahan and Kashan, and held in fief by the 
family of the Hissam es Saltaneh (Sultan Murad Mirza, d. 1882). 
It contains eighty-two villages and hamlets, has a revenue of 
about £4000, and a population of about 23,000. It is divided 
into four districts: Barzrud, Natanzrud, Tarkrud and Badrud. 
Natanz pears are famous throughout the country. The western 
part of the province is traversed from north to south by the 
old high-road between Kashan and Isfahan, with the well-known 
stations of Kuhrnd (7140 ft.) and So (7560 ft.). This road was 
practically abandoned when the Indian government telegraph 
line, which ran along it, was removed to a road farther east in 
1906. The capital of the little province is Natanz, a large village 
with a population of about 3000, situated 69 m. north of Isfahan, 
at an elevation of 5670 ft. It has an old mosque, with a minaret 
123 ft. in height, built in 1315. 


NATCHEZ, a city and the county-seat of Adams county, 
Mississippi, U.S.A., on the Mississippi river, about 100 m. S.W. 
of Jackson. Pop. (1890) 10,101, (1900) 12,210, of whom 7090 
were negroes, (1910 census) 11,791. It is served by the 
Yazoo & Mississippi Valley, the St Louis, Iron Mountain & 
Southern, the New Orleans & North-Western and the Mississippi 
Central railways, and by steamboats on the Mississippi river. 
The city, which has an area of 2-19 sq. m., is mostly on a hluff 
that rises 200 ft. above the river, the wharfs and landings, and a 
few old buildings being the only reminders of what was before 
the Civil War the principal business section. Among the city's 
institutions are the Fisk Public Library, a charity hospital, 
two sanatoriums, three orphan asylums, Stanton College for 
girls (non-sectarian; opened in 1894 and lodged in the old Fisk 
mansion), St Joseph's College for girls, the Jefferson Military 
College (1802), 6 m. from the city, and Natchez College for 
negroes. The city has four puhlic parks, three on the river 
front, and one, Memorial Park, in honour of Confederate dead, 
in the heart of the city. On a neighbouring bluff is a national 
cemetery. Just outside the city timits, at Gloster, the former 
estate of Winthrop Sargent, first governor of the Territory of 
Mississippi, are the graves of Sargent and S. S. Prentiss, who lived 
in Natchez for some years. In and near the city are many 
handsome old residences typical of ante-bellum Natchez, among 
them being: Monmouth, General Quitman's estate; Somerset 
and Oakland, long in the Chotard family; and The Briars, 
the home during girlhood of Varina Howell, the wife of Jefferson 
Davis. A Roman Catholic cathedral (1841), Trinity Protestant 
Episcopal Church (1825) and a Presbyterian church (1829) 
are the principal church buildings. The Prentiss and the Elk 
are the leading clubs. Mardi Gras is annually celebrated. The 
leading industries are the shipment of cotton (70,000 to 90,000 
bales are handled annually) and the manufacture of cottonseed 
oil and cake — the first cottonseed-oil mill in the country was 
built here in 1834 — cotton goods, rope and yarns, lumher, 
brick, drugs and ice. Natchez was the first city in the state to 
own municipal water- works and sewage system. 

The city was named from the Natchez Indians who lived on 
its site when the country was first settled. In 1 716 on the bluff 
Le Moyne de Bienville built Fort Rosalie for the protection of 
some French warehouses, and later the French demanded a 
neighbouring hill for another settlement. This offended the 
Natchez, and on the 28th of November 1729 they massacred the 
French and destroyed the fort, which was immediately rebuilt, 
and in 1764 was handed over to the English in accordance with 
the treaty of Paris, and became Fort Panmurej'in 1779 it was 
turned over to the Spanish, who held it until 1798, when they 
withdrew and United States troops occupied the place. Under 
Spanish rule Natchez was the seat of government of a large district, 
and from 1798 to 1802 and from 1817 to 1821 it was the capital of 
Mississippi. It was chartered as a city in 1803. On the 7th of 
May 1840 a large part of the city was destroyed by a tornado, 
but it was soon rebuilt, and at the outbreak of the Civil War was 
a place of considerable wealth and culture. For several years it 
was the home of General John Anthony Quitman (1 790-1858). 
Natchez surrendered to Union forces during the Vicksburg 
campaigns, first on the 12th of May 1862, and again on the 
13th of July 1863. On the 2nd of September 1862 the 
Union iron-clad " Essex," commanded by William David 
Porter, bombarded the city and put an end to the commercial 
importance of the river front section. 


NATHANAEL, a character in the New Testament, who appears 
in John i. 45 sqq. as one of the first disciples of Jesus. In John 
xxi. 2 he is described as belonging to Cana of Galilee. The 
account of his call reveals to us a man of a deeply spiritual 
and sincere nature. Otherwise we know nothing beyond the 
mention of his name as one of the seven to whom, after the 
Resurrection, Christ revealed himself at the sea of Tiberias 
(John xxi. 2). But the interest he has evoked is shown by the 
attempts to identify him with other New Testament characters. 
Of these the one which has found most favour sees in him 
the apostle Bartholomew (q-v.). The actual identification must 
however remain a matter of pure conjecture. Still less can 
be said for the attempts to find in Nathanael another 
name for the apostle Matthew, or for Matthias, or for Paul " the 
apostle of visions/' or even for the writer of the Fourth Gospel 
himself. 

Bibliography. — For the story of Nathanael's call see Archbishop 
Trench, Studies in the Gospels, No. 2, and on his character, J. H. 
Newman's Sermons for the Festivals of the Church, No. 27. 


NATHUBHOY, SIR MANGALDAS (1832-1890), Seth or head 
of the Kapol Bania caste, well known for their thrift and keen 
commercial instincts. He was horn on the 15th of October 
1832, of a family whose ancestors emigrated from Diu to 
Bombay soon after Bombay came into British possession. His 
grandfather, Ramdas Manordas, amassed a considerable fortune, 
which, owing to the premature death of his father, came into 
the sole possession of Mangaldas at the age of eleven. He had 
to take charge of the business in early life, though he gave some 
time to English studies. On the death of his wife he established 
a dispensary at Kalyan in her memory and also a special female 
ward in connexion with the David Sassoon hospital in Poona. 
As a merchant Mangaldas was upright and successful. In social 
matters he stood forth as a reformer, and to him the change to 
election from hereditary succession to the headship of the caste 
is due. In 1862 he founded a fellowship in Bombay university 
to allow graduates to spend some years in Europe. A bequest 
in his will enabled the university to establish seven similar 
scholarships. He took keen interest in learning, and in such 
institutions as the Asiatic and geographical societies. In 1866 
he was nominated to the legislative council and sat till 1874. 
In 1867 he revived the Bombay association, a political body, 
over which he presided for a time. In 1872 he was made C.G.I. , 
and in 1875 the dignity of Knight Bachelor was conferred on 
him. Besides a large donation to the Indian Famine Fund, 
Sir Mangaldas is known to have expended £500,000 on charities. 
He died at Bombay on the 9th of March 1890. 


NATICK, a township of S.E. Middlesex county, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A., on the S.E. end of Cochituate Lake. Pop. (1890) 9118; 
(1900) 9488, of whom 1788 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 
9866. The area of the township is 1 2-375 sq. m. The township's 
largest village, also named Natick, lying 18 m. W.S.W. of Boston, 
is served by the Boston & Albany railroad; it has the Walnut 
Hill preparatory school, the Leonard Morse hospital, and a public 
library, the Morse institute, which was given by Mary Ann 
Morse (1825-1862) and was built in 1873. In the village of 
South Natick is the Bacon Free Library (1880), in which is 
housed the Historical, Natural History and Library Society. 
In 1905 the factory product was valued at $3>453>°94; the 
boots and shoes manufactured in 1005 were valued at $2,896,110 
or 83-9% of the town's total, the output of brogans being 
especially important. Other distinctive manufactures are shirts 
and base-balls. Natick is the Indian name, signifying "our 
land,'\or " hilly land/' of the site (originally part of Dedham) 
granted in 1650 to John Eliot, for the " praying " Indians. 
There was an Indian church in Natick, at what is now called 
South Natick or " Old town," from 1660 to 17 16; and for some 
years the community was governed, in accordance with the 
eighteenth chapter of Exodus, by " rulers of tens," " rulers 
of fifties," and " rulers of hundreds." Until 1719 the Indians 
held the land in common. In 1735 the few Indians remaining 
were put under guardianship. The township owns a copy 
of Eliot's Indian Bible. An Eliot monument was erected in 
1847 on the Indian burying-ground near the site of the Indian 
church, now occupied by a Unitarian church. Of the Eliot 
oaks, made famous by Longfellow's sonnet, one was cut down 
in 1842, the other still stands. Henry Wilson learned to make 
shoes here, and in the presidential campaign in 1840 gained the 
sobriquet of the " Natick cohbler." By the colonial authorities 
Natick was considered as a " plantation " until the establishment 
of the church; in 1762 the parish (erected in 1745) became a 
district, and in 1 78 1 this was incorporated as a town. 

See " Natick," by S. D. Hosmer, Daniel Wight and Austin Bacon, 
in vol. 2 of S. A. Drake's History of Middlesex County (Boston, 1 880) ; 
and Oliver N. Bacon, History of the Town of Natick (Boston, 1856). 
NATIONAL ANTHEMS OR HYMNS. The selection of some 
particular songs, words and music, as the formal expression 
of national patriotism, is a comparatively modern development 
of ceremonial usage. In Europe the chief national anthems 
are: The United Kingdom: " God save the king " (see below); 
France: "The Marseillaise," by Rouget de Lisle; Germany: 
" Heil dir im Siegeskranz," words by Balthasar Gerhard 
Schumacher, music of " God save the King "; Switzerland: 
" Rufst du, mein Vaterland," music of " God save the King "; 
Italy: the " Royal March " by G. Gabetti; Austria: " Gott 
erhalte unsern Kaiser," words by L. L. Haschka, music by 
Haydn; Hungary: " Isten aid meg a Magyart "; Belgium: 
"La Brabanconne," by F. Campenhout; Holland: " Wien 
Nierlansch "; Denmark: "Heil dir, dem Liebenden," words 
by H. Harries, music of "God save the King," and "King 
Kristian stod ved hojen mast," words by Ewald, music by 
Hartman; Sweden: M Ur Svenska hjertans "; Russia: 
" Bozhe Zaria chrany," words by J. J. Canas, music by D. 
Jenko; Rumania: " Traeasca Regale," words by V. Alexandri, 
music by E. A. Hiibsch; Spain: " Himno de Riego," music 
by Herta. In the United States, the " Star Spangled Banner " 
(1814; words by F.S. Key, music by J. S. Smith) and "Hail 
Columbia " (1798; words by Joseph Hopkinson, music by 
Fyles) share the duties of a national anthem, while the tune 

	/vf » n^A coiro ttiA TTiTicr " ic enner tn wnrrld bpfrinninD" " Mv 

of " God save the King " is sung to words beginning 
country, 'tis of thee," by Samuel F. Smith (1808-1895). 

	My 

The most celebrated of all national anthems is the English 
" God save the King." which is said to have been first sung 
as his own composition by Henry Carey in 1740; and a version 
was assigned by W. Chappell (Popular Music) to the Harmonia 
Anglicana of 1742 or 1743, but no copy exists and this is now 
doubted. Words and music were printed in the Gentleman's 
Magazine for October 1745. There has been much controversy 
as to the authorship, which is complicated by the fact that 
earlier forms of the air and the words are recorded. Such are 
an " Ayre " of 1619, attributed to John Bull, who has long been 
credited with the origin of the anthem; the Scottish carol, 
" Remember, O thou man," in Ravenscroft's Melismata, 161 1; 
the ballad " Franklin is fled away " (printed 1669; and a 
piece in Purcell's Choice Collection for the Harpsichord (1696). 
The words or part of them are also found in various forms from 
the 16th century. The question was discussed in Richard 
Clarke's Account of the National Anthem (1822), and has been 
reinvestigated by Dr W. H. Cummings in his God save the 
King (1902). Carey and Bull, in the general opinion of musical 
historians, divide the credit; but in his Minstrelsy of England 
(1901) Frank Kidson introduced a new claimant, James Oswald, 
a Scotsman who settled in London in 1742, and worked for 
John Simpson, the publisher of the early copies of God save the 
King] and who became chamber composer to George III. What 
appears to be certain is that 1745 is the earliest date assignable 
to the substantial national anthem as we know it, and that 
both words and music had been evolved out of earlier forms. 
Bull's is the earliest form of the air; Carey's claim to the re- 
modelling of the anthem rests on an unauthoritative tradition; 
and, on general probabilities, Oswald is a strong candidate. 
The tune was adopted by Germany and by Denmark before 
the end of the 18th century. 


NATIONAL DEBT. Details as to the recent figures of the 
national debts of individual countries are given under the 
heading of each country, and the reader is also referred to the 
article Finance. Here the subject is considered in its technical 
aspects — including the special character of the institution, the 
different classes of debt, the various methods of raising loans, 
interest, funding systems, comparative statistics of national 
debts and other points. 

National debt is so universal that it has been described as 
the first stage of a nation towards civilization. A nation, so 
far as its finances are concerned, may be regarded as a corporate 
body or even as an individual. Like the one or the other it may 
borrow money at rates of interest, and with securities, general 
or special, proportionate to its resources, credit and stability. 
But, while in this respect' there are certain points of analogy 
between a state and an individual, there are important points of 
difference so far as the question of debt is concerned. A state, 
for example, may be regarded as imperishable, and its debt as a 
permanent institution which it is not bound to liquidate at any 
definite period, the interest, unless specially stipulated, being 
thus of the nature of transferable permanent annuities. While 
an individual who borrows engages to pay interest to the lender 
personally, and to reimburse the entire debt by a certain date, 
a state may have an entirely different set of creditors every six 
months, and may make no stipulation whatever with regard to 
the principal. A state, moreover, is the sole judge of its own 
solvency, and is not only at liberty either to repudiate its debts 
or compound with its "creditors, but even when perfectly solvent 
may materially alter the conditions on which it originally 
borrowed. These distinctions explain many of the peculiarities 
of national debts as contrasted with those of individuals — 
though a nation, like an individual, may by reckless bad faith 
utterly destroy its credit and exhaust its borrowing powers. 

A well-organized state ought to have within itself the means of 
meeting all its ordinary expenses; where this is not the case, 
either through insufficiency of resources or maladministration, 
and where borrowing is resorted to for what may be regarded as 
current expenses, a state imperils, not only its credit, but, when 
any crisis occurs, its very existence; in illustration of this we need 
only refer to the cases of Turkey in Europe and some of the states* 
of Central and South America. Even for meeting emergencies 
it is not always inevitable that a state should incur debt; its 
ordinary resources, from taxation or from state property, may 
so exceed its ordinary expenses as to enable it to accumulate 
a fund for extraordinary contingencies. This, it would seem, was 
a method commonly adopted in ancient states. The Athenians, 
for example, amassed 10,000 talents in the interval between the 
Persian and the Peloponnesian wars, and the Lacedaemonians 
are said to have done the same. At Susa and Ecbatana Alexander 
found a great treasure which had been accumulated by Cyrus. 
In the early days of Rome the revenue from certain sources was 
accumulated as a sacred treasure in the temple of Saturn; 
and we know that when Pompey left Italy he made the mistake 
of leaving behind him the public treasury, which fell into the 
hands of Caesar. In later times, also, the more prudent emperors 
were in the habit of amassing a hoard. We find that the method 
of accumulating reserves prevailed among some of the early 
French kings, even down to the time of Henry IV. This system 
long prevailed in Prussia. Frederick II., when he ascended the 
throne, found in the treasury a sum of 8,700,000 thalers, and 
it is estimated that at his death he left behind him a hoard of 
from 60 to 70 million thalers. And similarly, in our own time, 
of the five milliards of indemnity paid by France as a result of 
the Franco-German War, 150 millions were set apart to recon- 
stitute the traditional war-treasury. The German empire, 
apart from the individual states which comprise it, had in 1882 
a debt of about £24,000,000, while its invested funds amounted 
t0 £37)39o,ooo, including a war-treasure of £6,000,000. The 
majority of economists disapprove of such an accumulation of 
funds by a state as a bad financial policy, maintaining that the 
remission of a proportionate amount of taxation would be much 
more for the real good of the nation. At the same time the 
possession of a moderate war-fund, it must be admitted, could 
not but give a state a great advantage in the case of a sudden 
war. In the case of England, apart from the private hoardings 
of a few sovereigns, there does not seem to have existed any 
deliberately accumulated public treasure; before the time of 
William and Mary English monarchs borrowed money occasion- 
ally from Jews and from the city of London, but emergencies 
were generally met by " benevolences " and increased imposts. 

All modern states, it may be said, have been compelled to 
have recourse to loans, either to meet war expenses, to carry out 
great public undertakings or to make up the recurrent deficits of 
a mismanaged revenue. Resources obtained in this way are 
what constitute national debt proper. Loans have been divided 
into forced and voluntary. Forced loans can, of course, only be 
raised within the bounds of the borrowing country; and, apart 
from the injustice which is sure to attend such an impost, it is 
always economically mischievous. The loans which the kings 
of England were wont to exact from the Jews were really of 
the character of forced loans, though the method has never been 
used in England in modern times so extensively as on the 
continent. There the sum sought to be obtained in this way has 
never been anything like realized. In 1793, for example, a loan 
of this class was imposed in France, on the basis of income; 
and of the milliard (francs) which it was sought to raise only 
100 millions were realized. In Austria and Spain, also, recourse 
has been had at various times to forced loans, but invariably 
with unsatisfactory results. Other methods of a more or less 
compulsory character have been and are made use of in various 
states for obtaining money, which, as they involve the payment 
of interest, may be regarded as of the nature of loans; but the 
debt incurred by such methods is comparatively insignificant, 
and some of the methods adopted are peculiarly irritating and 
mischievous. On the other hand, it has occasionally been 
attempted to raise voluntary loans by appeals to a nation's 
patriotism; the method has been confined almost exclusively 
tb France. After the revolutions of 1830 and 1848 appeals were 
thus made to the patriotism of French capitalists to buy 5% 
direct from the government at par, at a time when the French 5 % 
were selling at 80; but the results were quite insignificant. 
In short, the only economically sound method of meeting ex- 
penses which the ordinary resources of a state cannot meet is 
by borrowing in the open market on the most advantageous terms 
obtainable. On this normal method of borrowing, loans are 
divided into different categories, though there are really only 
two main classes, which may be designated perpetual and 
terminable. Borrowing in quasi-perpetuity has hitherto been 
the mode adopted by most states in the creation of the bulk of 
their debt. Not that any state ever borrows with the avowed 
intention of never paying off debts; but either no definite 
period for reimbursement is fixed, or the limit has been so 
extended as to be practically perpetual, or in actual practice 
the debt has been got rid of by the creation of another of equal 
amount under similar or slightly differing conditions as to interest. 
Of course a state is not bcund to retain any part of its debt as 
a perpetual burden ; it is at liberty to liquidate whenever it suits 
its convenience. This quasi-perpetuity of debt in the case of a 
state in a sound financial condition involves no hardship upon its 
creditors, who may at any moment realize their invested capital 
by selling their titles as creditors in the open money market, it 
may be at the price they paid, or it may be a little below or a 
little above it, according to the state of the market at the time. 
Loans, again, contracted on the terminable principle are of 
various classes; the chief of these are (1) life annuities, (2) 
terminable annuities, (3) loans repayable by instalments at 
certain intervals, (4) loans repayable entirely at a fixed date. 

From the time of William III. life and terminable annuities 
have been a favourite mode in England either of borrowing 
money or of commuting, and thus gradually paying off, the 
existing funded debt. At first, and indeed until comparatively 
recent times, the system of life annuities resulted in serious loss 
to the country, owing to the calculation of the rate of annuity 
on too high a scale, a result arising from imperfect data on which 
to base estimates of the average duration of life. The system of 
life annuities was sometimes combined in England with that of 
perpetual annuities, or interest on the permanent debt — the 
life annuity forming a sort of additional inducement to lenders 
of limited means to invest their money. At one time the form 
of life annuities known as tontine was much in vogue both in 
England and France, the principle of the tontine being that the 
proceeds of the total amount invested by the contributors 
should be divided among the survivors, the last survivor receiving 
the whole interest or annuity. The results of this system were 
not, however, encouraging to the state. In England, at least, 
the terminable annuity has been a favourite mode of borrowing 
from the time of William III.; it has been generally conjoined 
with a low rate of permanent interest on the sum borrowed. 
Thus in 1700 the interest on the consolidated debt amounted 
to only £260,000, while the terminable annuities payable 
amounted to £308,407. In 1780 a loan of 12 millions was raised 
at 4% at par, with the additional benefit of an annuity of 
£i, 16s. 3d.% for eighty years. Even so late as the Crimean 
War in 1855, a loan of 16 millions at 3% at par was contracted, 
the contributors receiving in addition an annuity of 14s. 6d.% 
for thirty years. 

The third method of contracting terminable loans, that of 
gradual repayment or amortization within a certain limit of 
years, has been a favourite one among certain nations, and 
specially commends itself to those whose credit is at a low ebb. 
When the final term of repayment is fixed upon, a calculation is 
easily made as to how much is to be paid half-yearly until the 
expiry of the term, so that at the end the whole, principal and 
interest, will have been paid. At first, of course, the amount 
paid will largely represent interest, but, as at each half-yearly 
drawing of the numbers of the bonds to be finally paid off the 
principal will be gradually reduced, there will be more and more 
money set free from interest for the reduction of the actual debt. 
This method, as we have said, has its advantages, and when 
conjoined with stipulations as to liberty of conversion to debt 
bearing a lower rate of interest than that originally offered, and 
when the bonds are not issued at a figure much below par, 
might be the most satisfactory method of raising money for a 
state under certain emergencies. What is known as the " Morgan 
loan " of France in 1870 was contracted on such conditions. 

The last form of temporary loan,* that repayable in bulk at a 
fixed date, is one which, when the sum is of considerable amount, 
is apt to be attended with serious disadvantages. The repayment 
may have to be made at a time when a state may not be in a 
position to meet it, and so to keep faith with its creditors may 
have to borrow at a higher rate in order to pay their claims. 
It has, however, worked well in the United States, most of the 
debt of which has been contracted on the principle of optional 
payment at the end of a short period, say five years, and com- 
pulsory payment at the end of a longer period, say twenty years. 
Thus the loan of 515 millions of dollars contracted in 1862 was 
issued on this principle, at 6 %, and so with other loans between 
that year and 1868. In European states, however, the risks 
of embarrassment are too great to permit of the application 
of this method on an extensive scale; and for loans of great 
amount the methods most likely to yield satisfactory results 
are loans bearing quasi-perpetual interest, or those repayable 
by instalments on the basis of half-yearly drawings within a 
certain period. 

What are known as lottery loans are greatly favoured on the 
continent, either as an independent means of raising money, or 
as an adjunct to any of the methods referred to above. These 
must not be confounded with the lottery pure and simple, in 
which the contributors run the risk of losing the whole of their 
investment. The lottery loan has been found to work well for 
small sums, when the interest is but little below what it would 
have been in an ordinary loan, and when the percentage thus 
set aside to form prizes of varying amounts forms but a small 
fraction of the whole interest payable. The principle is that 
each contributor of such a loan has a greater or less chance of 
drawing a prize of varying amount, over and above the repayment 
of his capital with interest. 

What are known in England as exchequer bills and treasury 
bills may be regarded as loans payable at a fixed period of short 
duration, from three months upwards, and bearing very in- 
significant interest, even so low as \%. They are a useful 
means of raising money for immediate wants and for local loans, 
and form handy investments for capitalists who are reserving 
their funds for a special purpose. Exchequer bonds are simply 
a special form of the funded debt, to be paid off generally within 
a certain period of years. 

There are two principal methods of issuing or effecting a loan. 
Either the state may appeal directly to capitalists and invite sub- 
scriptions, or it may delegate the negotiation to one or more bankers. 
The former method has been occasionally followed in France and 
Russia, but in practice it has been found to be attended with so 
many disadvantages to the borrowing state or city that the best 
financial authorities consider it unsound. The great banking- 
houses have such a command over the money-market that it is 
difficult to keep even a direct loan out of their hands. The majority 
pi loans, therefore, are negotiated by one or more of these houses, 
and the name of Rothschild is familiar to every one in connexion 
with such transactions. By this method a borrowing state can 
assure itself of having the proceeds of the loan with the least possible 
delay and with the minimum of trouble. A lean may be issued at, 
above, or below par, though generally it is either at or below par — 
" par " being the normal or theoretical price of a single share in the 
loan, the sum which the borrowing government undertakes to pay 
back for each share on reimbursement, without discount orpremium. 
Very generally, as an inducement to investors, a loan is offered at a 
greater or less discount, according to the credit of the borrowing 
government. Sometimes a state may offer a loan to the highest 
bidders; for example, the city of Auckland in 1875 invited sub- 
scriptions through the Bank of New Zealand to a loan of £100,000 
at 6%; offers were made of six times the amount, but only those 
were accepted which were at the rate of 98% or above. The rate of 
interest offered generally depends on the credit of the state issuing 
the loan. England, for example, would have no difficulty in raising 
any amount at 3 % or even less, while less stable states may have to 
pay 8 or 9 %. The nominal percentage is by no means, however, 
always an index of the cost of a loan to a state, as the history of 
the debt of England disastrously shows. During the 18th century 
various expedients were employed, besides that of terminable 
annuities already referred to, to raise money for the great wars 
of the period, at an apparently low percentage. For example, from 
3 to 5% would be offered for a loan, the actual amount of stock 
.per cent, allotted being sometimes 107 J or even m; so that 
between 1776 and 1785, for the £91,763,842 actually borrowed by 
the government, £115,267,993 was to be paid back. In 1797 a loan 
of £1,620,000 was contracted, for every £100 of which actually 
subscribed, at 3%, the sum of £219 was allotted to the lender. 
In 1793 a 3% loan of 45 millions was offered at the price of £72 %, 
the government thus making itself liable for £6,250,000. Greatly 
owing to this reckless method the debt of Great Britain in 1815 
amounted to over 900 millions. France in this respect has been 
quite as extravagant as England; many of her loans during the 
19th century were issued at from 52 J to 84%, one indeed (1848) 
so low as 45% — as a rule with 5% interest. The enormous and 
embarrassing increase of the French debt during the 19th century 
was doubtless greatly due to this disastrous system. Nearly every 
European state and most of the Central and South American states 
have at one time or another aggravated their debts by this method 
of borrowing, and got themselves into difficulty^ with their creditors. 
Financiers almost unanimously maintain that in the long run it is 
much better for a state to borrow at high interest at or near par, 
than at an apparently low interest much below par. A state of even 
the highest rank may find itself in the midst of a crisis that will for 
a time shake its credit; but when the crisis is past and its credit 
revives it will be in a much more sound position with a. high interest 
for a debt contracted at par than with a comparatively low interest 
on a debt much in excess of what it really received. If a state, for 
example, borrows at par at 6 % when its credit is low, it may easily 
when again in a flourishing condition reduce the interest on its debt 
to 4 or even 3 %. The United States government actually did so 
with the debt it had to contract at the time of the Civil War. This 
method of reducing the burden of a debt is evidently no injustice to 
the creditors of a government, when used in a legitimate way. A 
state is at liberty at any time to pay off its debts, and, if it can 
borrow at 3% to pay off a 6% debt, it may with perfect justice 
offer its creditors the option of payment of the principal or of holding 
it at a reduced interest. Government debts are, however, sometimes 
reduced after a fashion by no means so legitimate as this. Other 
states have been even more unprincipled, and have got rid of their 
debts at one sweep by the simple method of repudiation. 

When a state has a variety of loans at varying rates of interest, 
it may consolidate them into a single debt at a^ uniform interest. 
For example, in 1751 several descriptions of English debt were con- 
. solidated into one fund bearing a uniform interest of 3 %, an opera- 
tion which gave origin to the familiar term " consols " (" consoli- 
dated annuities "). In the earlydays of the English national debt, 
a special tax or fund was appropriated to the payment of the interest 
on each particular loan. This was the original meaning of " the 
funds," a term which has now come to signify the national debt 
generally. So also the origin of the term " funded " as applied to a 
debt which has been recognized as at least quasi-permanent, and for 
the payment of the interest on which regular provision is made. 
Unfunded or floating debt, on the other hand, means strictly loans 
for which no permanent provision requires to be made, which have 
been obtained for temporary purposes with the intention of paying 
them off within a brief period. Exchequer and treasury bills are 
included in this category, and such other moneys in the hands of a 
government as it may be required to reimburse at any moment. 
Where a government is the recipient of savings banks deposits, these 
may be included in its floating debt, and so also may the paper- 
money which has been issued so largely by some governments. A 
state with an excessive floating debt must be regarded as in a very 
critical financial condition. 

National debt, again, is divided into external and internal, accord- 
ing as the loans have been raised within or without the country — 
some states, generally the smaller ones, having a # considerable 
amount of exclusively internal debt, though it is obvious that the 
bulk of national debts are both external and internal. 

We referred above to various ways of reducing the burden of a 
debt, and also to methods of contracting loans by which within a 
certain period they are amortized or extinguished. Most states, 
however, are burdened with enormous quasi- permanent debts, the 
reduction or extinction of which gives ample scope for the financial 
skill of statesmen. A favourite method of accomplishing this is by 
the establishment of what is known as a sinking fund, formed by 
the setting aside of a certain amount of national revenue for the 
reduction of the principal of the debt. 0* S. K.) 

The following table shows the general state of the world's 
public indebtedness at the beginning of the 20th century, divided 
according to the more important countries, the bracketed 
figures in black type indicating the position of the country 
referred to under each heading in the list. The figures are given 
by preference for the year 1900, as more representative, in a case 
like this, than for some later years; for the Boer War, as regards 
the United Kingdom, and also the Russo-Japanese War, intro- 
duced new debt and new considerations, hardly fair to the 
comparison, while this stands at the end of a long period of 
peace. The figures in every case are not to be supposed to be 
absolutely accurate; statistics of national debts differ, often 
remarkably, and it is practically impossible to give a perfectly 
satisfactory comparison, owing partly to difficulties of computing 
the exchange, partly to inaccurate accounts, and partly to the 
varieties of debt (reproductive or non-reproductive, &c). 

Kingdom (756 millions) stood second to that of France (1000 
millions), in 1900 it stood third to France and Russia; whereas 
in 1883 its weight per head of population was third, in 1900 it 
was eleventh; whereas in 1883 its annual charge stood second, 
in. 1900 it stood fourth; and whereas the weight of the charge 
per head of population in 1883 was fifth, in 1900 it was eleventh. 
The indebtedness of the great British dependencies, on the 
other hand, had increased from 302 millions to 544 millions 
sterling, or by 242 millions; and the local (municipal) debt of 
Great Britain had risen from about 100 millions to upwards of 
300 millions. 

It is interesting to recall the history of the British national 
debt during the 19th century. The debt at the close of the 
Napoleonic war (1816) was nearly 887 millions sterling, History 
and at the beginning of 1900 this debt had been of 
reduced to 621 millions, 1 or a decrease of 266 millions — British 
notwithstanding interim additions of about 367 atbL 
millions, which made the gross reduction during that period 
633 millions sterling, an amount actually larger than the whole 
(dead- weight 2 ) debt at the end of the century. No country 
(except the United States, to a smaller amount) has ever 
redeemed its obligations on such a scale, and this was done 
while all other European countries of similar standing were 
piling up debt. 

This enormous reduction was effected at different rates of 
speed. Between 181 7 and 1830, when what was known as 
[?]

	The Principal Public Debts of the World, 1900. 

	Country. 
	The United Kingdom 
	British Dominions over Sea- 
	India .... 
	Australian States 
	New Zealand 
	Canada .... 
	Cape Colony 
	Natal .... 
	France 
	Russia 
	Austria 
	Hungary .... 
	Italy ..... 
	United States of America . 
	Spain 
	Turkey 
	Egypt 
	Prussia 
	German Empire . 
	Portugal .... 
	Holland .... 
	Belgium .... 
	Japan 
	China 
	Argentina .... 
	Brazil 
	Population. 
	Total Debt. 
	Per Head. 
	Annual Charge. 
	Per Head. 
	40,909,925 
	230,000,000 
	3.707»905 
	815,820 
	5,338,883 
	1,527,224 
	902,365 
	38,517,975 
	129,211,113 
	25,886,000 
	19,203,531 
	32,449,754 
	76,303*387 
	18,089,500 
	23,880,000 
	9,734,ooo 
	34,472,509 
	56,345,000 
	5,049,729 
	5,104,137 
	6,744,000 
	43,759,577 
	390,000,000 
	4,400,000 
	17,000,000 
	(3) £628,978,782 
	(10) 
	(23) 
	ill! 
	(25) 
	210,323,937 
	195,324,717 
	47.874,452 
	53,254,689 
	27,884,078 
	9,019,143 
	I) 1,086,215,525 
	(2) 656,000,000 
	(6) 358,438,000 
	(11) 184,600,000 
	(41 586,000,000 
	(8) 292,216,265 
	(5) 433,283,066 
	(13) 170,000,000 
	(16) 103,372,000 
	(?) 329,584,000 
	(14) 118,554,789 
	(12) 177,192,795 
	(18) 96,561,287 
	(15) 104,551,000 
	(22) 52,903,000 
	(20) 55,000,000 
	(17) 103,000,000 
	(19) 81,710,000 
	o 18 
	52 13 
	58 12 
	10 o 
	18 
	10 
	28 
	5 
	(11) £15 7 6 
	(24) 
	(2) 
	<A 
	(14 
	(8) 
	(15) 
	(4 
	(19 
	(12) 
	(16) 
	(9) 
	(21 
	(5) 
	(18) 
	(13) 
	(17) 
	(22) 
	i 3 } 
	M 
	10 
	(23) 
	(25) 
	< 6 > 
	(20) 
	5 
	o 
	4 
	2 
	13 16 11 
	9 14 o 
	18 o 
	3 15 
	24 1 
	7 o 
	10 12 
	9 7 
	2 2 
	35 o 
	18 18 
	15 13 
	1 4 
	o 3 
	23 12 
	4 16 
	o 
	6 
	5 
	o 
	4 
	6 
	1 
	o 
	o 
	6 
	2 
	o 
	o 
	o 
	(4) £23,216,657 
	[11) 6,595,732 
	(°) 7r595,074 
	32) 1,717,910 
	(21) 2,678,496 
	(23) 1,331,737 
	(24) 350,204 
	(1) 49,844,652 
	(2) 29,000,000 
	(6) 14,067,000 
	(8) 11,977,640 
	(3) 27,000,000 
	[10) 6,709,026 
	(5) 16,742,285 
	(13) 5,148,450 
	(15) 4,222,379 
	(7) 13,923,170 
	(16) 3,794,461 
	;i4) 4,434,243 
	k 20) 2,926,553 
	(17) 3,320,404 
	;i8 3,176,759 
	19) 3,000,000 
	12) 6,301,419 
	(11) £0 n 4 
	6 
	o 
	o 
	o 
	5 
	7 9 
	5 11 
	4 7 
	o o 
	2 1 
	2 2 
	o 10 
	o 17 
	o 
	I 
	o 
	O II 
	O 12 
	O 16 
	O I 
	o 18 
	o 4 
	o 
	o 
	o 1 4i 
	o 15 10 
	o 11 1} 
	099 
	1 5 
	002 
	1 8 7 
	6 
	6 
	7 
	9 
	2 
	3 
	8 8 
	7 5. 

The total indebtedness of the countries named in the table 
amounted to £6,311,017,478, and the total indebtedness of the 
world (i.e. including countries not here mentioned) for the year 
1898 was computed by Lord Avebury (Joum. Roy. Stat. Soc. 
vol. briv. part i.) as £6,432,757,000, as against £5,097,910,000 
in 1888. This compares (taking figures compiled by Mr Dudley 
Baxter in Joum. Roy. Stat. Soc, March 1874) with a total indebted- 
ness of 4680 millions sterling in 1874 and 1700 millions sterling 
in 1848. The United Kingdom had diminished its total debt 
since 1883 by 127 millions, the amount per head by £6, the annual 
charge by 6 millions, and the charge per head by 5s. 8d. The 
United States debt was lower by nearly a hundred millions. 
Japan, Egypt and Brazil had sensibly improved their positions. 
But the following countries had increased their debts: France 
(by 86 millions), Russia (by some 240 millions), Italy (by 140 
millions), Austria-Hungary (by 70 millions), Spain (by 190 
millions), Prussia (by 227 millions), Portugal (by 80 millions), 
Holland (by 18 millions), Belgium (by32 millions), and Argentina 
(by 73 millions). 

The result is that, whereas in 1883 the total debt of the United 
Pitt's sinking fund was in operation (depending upon the 
devotion of surplus income to the repayment of debt, but much 
complicated by the raising of fresh loans), a net reduction was 
made of £29,488,072 — an annual average of £2,268,313. From 
1830 to 1876 the system of using surplus revenue — the so-called 
old sinking fund — for redeeming debt, was steadily applied, 
together with the creation of terminable annuities, by which 
definite blocks of debt were cancelled and the whole amount 
paid off in a term of years. During this period the debt was 
reduced by £85,175,782, an annual average of £1,851,647. In 
1876 Sir Stafford Northcote's (Lord Iddesleigh/s) new sinking 
fund came into operation, in addition to previous methods of 
redeeming debt. By this system a definite annual sum was set 
aside for the service of the debt, the difference between it and 

	1 Leaving out of account 8 millions of unfunded debt raised for 
	the Boer War. 

	2 The " dead-weight " debt, or national debt proper, excludes what 
	are treated in the public accounts as "other capital liabilities," the 
	interest on which is not included in the fixed charge; but it is taken 
	to include the new debt of all sorts raised in 1900, 1901 and 1902 
	for the Boer War. 

	Consols. 

the amount required for payment of interest forming a (new) 
sinking fund devoted to repayment of capital. This fixed charge 
was gradually reduced from about 29 millions to 26 millions in 
1888, to 25 millions in 1890, and to 23 millions in 1899. 
The amount paid off during this period by means of old 
sinking fund, terminable annuities and new sinking fund, down 
to March 1900, was £155,238,639, or an annual average of 
£6,468,276. 

It will be observed that the burden of the debt incurred 
previously to 18 17 has thus been borne very unequally by 
different ages of " posterity." While the generations immedi- 
ately succeeding the Napoleonic war paid off about £2,000,000 
a year, the taxpayers between 1876 and 1900 paid at three 
times that rate. They did so largely without knowing it, since 
a large part of the amount was wrapped up in the terminable 
annuities; but it is very questionable justice that so large a 
proportion of the burden should have been imposed upon 
them. 

The great bulk of the funded national debt consists of what 
are known as "consols." This name dates from 1751, when 
nine different government annuities at 3% were 
consolidated into one, amounting to £9,137,821. 
These " consolidated annuities " formed the germ of what has 
since become the type of British government stock. At the same 
time some of the annuities at a higher rate of interest were 
combined and the interest reduced to 3%, and this stock 
was known as "reduced," the two 3% stocks remaining 
side by side, until in 1854 the $\% government stock was 
also converted into 3%, under the style of "new threes." 
"Consols," "reduced" and "new threes" formed thenceforth 
a solid body of British 3% stock, until in 1888 the whole 
amount was converted (see Conversions below) by Mr (after- 
wards Lord) Goschen into 2f%. "Consols" were added to 
from time to time when fresh loans were needed: from 
39 millions in 1771 they rose to 71 millions 
in 1781, to 101 millions in 1783, 278 
millions in 1801, 334 millions in 1811, 
and 400 millions in 1858; but in 1888 
they had decreased, by redemptions, to 
£322,681,035. " Reduced " were also added 
to: from 17 millions in 1751 they rose to 
164 millions in 181 5, and then gradually 
diminished to 102 millions in 1869, and to £68,912,433 in 
1887, when they were converted with " consols " into the 
new consols (or " Goschens ") at 2$ %, to be reduced to z\% 
in 1003. 

The lowest price ever quoted for " consols " was 47I on 20th 
September 1797, owing to the mutiny at the Nore; the highest 
was 114 in 1896 owing t& scarcity of stock, the operation of the 
sinking funds, and the demand for investment of savings bank 
moneys. 

The high premium to which consols rose towards the end of 
the century may be briefly explained. Pari passu with the re- 
duction of the debt went a dwindling of the^ amount of consols 
open to investors, and hence occurred a continued normal appre- 
ciation of the stock. In 1817 the amount of British government 
stock per head of the population was £40, 10s.; in 1896 this figure 
had decreased to £14, 12s. The ordinary law of supply and demand 
would therefore in any case tend to increase the price of govern- 
ment stock. This has always happened. The amount of 3% 
diminished from 528 millions in 181 7 to 498 in 1827, and to 407 in 
1837, and the average prices in these years were 73, 83 and 90; 
additions were made to the stock, and in 1847 (the amount being 
j$io millions) the price was 86f; again the amount decreased, and 
in 1852 (500 millions) the price was 98 ; then a great conversion raised 
the amount to 734 millions in 1854, and the price went down to 90 J; 
but by 1887 the amount decreased by about 200 pillions, and the 
price rose well above par; and though the reduction in interest in 
1888 set back the price, it rose again as the amount of available 
stock diminished. Many causes, into which it is not necessaryto 
enter, operated no doubt in keeping up the demand for British 
government credit. Moreover, apart from the- fact that in 1882 
there were 689 millions of 3% and in 1900 only 501 millions 
of 2f % in existence, the amount held by government departments 
and therefore practically^ locked up from the market, gradually 
increased, until from this cause alone the amount of available 
stock was diminished by upwards of 200 millions; and a large 
amount more was practically locked up by being held by trustees, 
or by banks, insurance societies, &c. The savings banks deposits, 
increasing as they did by about £1,000,000 per month (owing partly 
to the raising in 1894 of the maximum limit), had to be invested 
in government securities; and the compulsory activity of the 
government as a buyer of consols, both on this account and also 
For sinking fund purposes (in order to obtain stock to redeem debt 
on the increased scale already indicated) operated as an abnormal 
cause for sending the price of consols high above par. Even at that 
figure (the average prices for consols being 101 r\ in 1894, 106J in 
1895, II 9* in l8 9 6 » II2 H in I ?97, nof| in 1898 and io6J—having 
fallen owing to war prospects — in 1899) it was difficult for the govern- 
ment brokers to obtain consols, and it was principally owing to this 
state of things that in 1899 Sir Michael Hicks-Beach reduced the 
fixed annual charge for the debt (and pro tanto the new sinking fund) 
from £25,000,000 to £23,000,000. 

It may be useful to give the figures for the British natipnal 
debt in 1902, after the disturbance due to the South African 
War. During the years 1900 and 1901 the new sinking fund was 
suspended, as well as the payments on the terminable annuity 
debt applicable to repayment of capital (except in so far as 
annuities to individuals were concerned) ; so that the debt was 
not reduced, as it would otherwise have been, by £4,547,000 in 
1900 and by £4,681,000 in 1901. On the contrary, it was 
increased by fresh borrowings. Consols were raised (in 1901 and 
1902) to the extent of £92,000,000; a " War Loan " of 2! % 
stock and bonds, redeemable in 1910, was raised (1900) to the 
amount of £30,000,000; 2\% exchequer bonds were raised 
(in 1900) to the amount of £24,000,000, and treasury bills (in 
1899 and 1900), £13,000,000. The total war borrowing amounted 
accordingly to £159,000,000, raised at a discount of (£6,585,000) 
4-14%. This includes the whole new borrowing in 1902, a 
portion of which was intended after the peace to be paid back 
in the current year; but for this no allowance can here be made. 
The accompanying table shows the totals for the " dead- weight 
debt " in 1900, 1901 and 1902, and, for convenience, also the 
" other capital liabilities." 

	"Dead- weight 
	Debt." 
	Chief Cause of Difference. l 
	Liabilities." 
	31st March 1900 . 
	1901 . . 
	1902 . . 
	July 1902 . . 
	£628,978,782 
	690,992,621 
	747,876,000 
	779,876,000 
	( +" War Loan," £30,000,000 
	•j -j-Exch. Bonds, 24,000,000 
	( -j-Treas. Bills, 5,000,000 
	-j-Consols, 60,000,000 
	-f-Consols, 32,000,000 
	£10,186,482 
	I4.73M56 
	20,532,000 

" Other liabilities " it must be remembered, represent money 
advanced (generally by terminable annuity) on reproductive 
objects — telegraphs, barracks, public works, Uganda railway, 
&c. — and they could not, obviously, be properly included in 
the national debt unless at the same time a set-off were made 
for the valuable assets held by the British government, such as 
the Suez canal shares, which in 1902 were alone worth upwards 
of £26,000,000. (H. Ch.) 

British National Debt Conversions. — The great bulk of the 
funded debt of the United Kingdom consists of annuities, which 
are described as perpetual, because the state is under no obliga- 
tion to pay off at any time the capital debt which they represent. 
All that the public creditor can claim is to receive payment of 
the instalments of annuity as they fall due. On the other hand, 
the government has the right to redeem the annuities ultimately 
by payment of the capital debt; though it may, and frequently 
does, bind itself not to exercise that right as regards a particular 
stock of annuities until after a definite period. So long as a 
stock is thus guaranteed against redemption, the only way in 
which the annual charge for that portion of the debt can be 
reduced is by the government buying back the annuities in the 
open market at their current price, which may be more or may 
be less than the nominal debt, according to general financial 
conditions and to the state of the national credit. The liability 
of the stock to redemption at par, when the period of guarantee 
has expired, prevents its market price from rising materially 
above that level. To enable the right of compulsory redemption 
to be enforced, it is only necessary that the government should 

	1 Other causes are redemption of land tax, variation in capital 
	value of terminable annuities and minor treasury operations. 

have command of sufficient funds for the purpose of paying off 
the stockholders, or should be able to raise those funds by 
borrowing at a rate of interest lower then that borne by the 
stock. Any circumstances which might tend to raise the price 
of the stock above par would also assist the government in 
raising its redemption money on more favourable terms. When 
the amount of stock to be dealt with is large, the raising by a 
fresh loan of the amount required for redemption would occasion 
great disturbance. A more convenient method is the conversion 
of the existing stock to a lower rate of interest by agreement 
with the stockholders, whose reluctance to accept a reduction 
of income is overborne by their knowledge that the power of 
redemption exists and will be put in force if necessary. The 
opportunity for conversion may be looked for when the price of a 
redeemable stock stands steadily at or barely above par. Observa- 
tion of the movements* in the price of other securities will serve 
to show whether this stationary price represents the real market 
value of the stock, or whether that value is subject to depression 
owing to an expectation of the stock being converted or redeemed. 
Accordingly, the course of prices of other government stocks 
which are free from the liability to redemption, of the stocks of 
foreign countries and the colonies, and of the large municipalities, 
must be watched by government in order to determine, first, 
whether the conversion of a redeemable stock is feasible, and, 
secondly, to what extent the reduction of the interest in the 
stock may be carried. 

The credit for the first measure of conversion belongs to Walpole, 
though it was carried through by Stanhope, his successor as chan- 
cellor of the exchequer. In 1714 the legal rate of interest 
1717* for. private transactions, which had been fixed at 6% 
in the year of the Restoration, was reduced to 5% by the act 12 
Anne, stat. 2, c. 16, But the bulk of the national debt still bore 
interest at 6%, the doubtful security of the throne and the too 
frequent irregularities in public payment having hitherto precluded 
any considerable borrowing at lower rates. Walpole saw that the 
first requirement was to give increased confidence to the public 
creditors. Three acts were passed dealing respectively with debts 
due to the general public, to the Bank of England and to the South 
Sea Company. Three separate funds — the general fund, the aggre- 
gate fund and the South Sea fund — were assigned to the service 
of the several classes of debt, each of these funds being credited 
with the produce of specified taxes, which were made permanent 
for the purpose; and it was further provided that any surplus of 
the funds, after payment of the interest of the debts, should be 
applied in reduction of the principal. Such was the success of this 
measure that, in spite of the reduction of interest from 6 to 5% 
which was also enacted, the passing of the acts was followed by a 
rise in the price of stocks. A curious preliminary to the introduction 
of these measures was the passing 01 a resolution by the House of 
Commons, which invited advances not exceeding £600,000, to be 
repaid with interest at 4% out of the first supplies of the year. 
The result showed that the time was not ripe for such a reduction 
of interest, as only a sum of £45,000 was offered on those terms. A 
further resolution was then passed, substituting 5% as the rate of 
interest, and the whole sum was at once subscribed. Besides accept- 
ing the reduction of interest on their own debts, the Bank of England 
and the South Sea Company agreed to assist the government by 
advancing 4J millions at the reduced rate, to be employed in paying 
off any of the general creditors who might refuse assent to the con- 
version. The assistance was not required, as all the creditors 
signified assent. The debts thus dealt with amounted altogether 
to about 25J millions, and the annual saving of interest effected 
(including that upon a large quantity of exchequer bills for which 
the Bank had been receiving over 7 %) was £329,000. 

Walpole had a further opportunity of effecting a conversion in 
1737* In the meantime much of the 5% debt had been reduced to 
1749 4% by arrangements with the Bank of England and the 

South Sea Company, and further borrowings had taken 
place at that rate and even at 3%. In 1737 the 3% stood above 
par, and Sir John Barnard proposed to the House of Commons a 
scheme for the gradual reduction of the 4 %. As a financial measure 
the scheme would doubtless have succeeded; but Walpole, moved 
apparently by consideration for his capitalist supporters, opposed 
and for the time defeated it. A scheme on similar lines was carried 
through by Pelham as chancellor of the exchequer in 1 749 and em- 
bodied in the act 23 Geo. II. c. 1. By that act holders of the 4% 
securities, amounting to nearly £58,000,000, were offered a con- 
tinuance of interest at 4% for one year, followed by 3!% for seven 
years, during which they were guaranteed against redemption, with 
a final reduction to 3% thereafter. It was necessary to continue 
the rate of 4 %^ for the first year, as any objecting stockholders 
could not belaid off without a year's notice. Three months were 
allowed for signifying assent to the proposal. At first it was viewed 
with disfavour, and both the Bank and the East India Company 
opposed it. But the pens of the government pamphleteers were 
busily occupied in showing the advantages of the offer, and at the 
close of the three months acceptances had been received from the 
holders of nearly £39,000,000 of the stocks, or more than two-thirds 
of the whole. A further opportunity was afforded to waverers by a 
second act (23 Geo. II. c. 22), which allowed three months more for 
consideration; but for holders accepting under this act the inter- 
mediate period of 3§ % interest was reduced from seven years to 
five. These terms brought in an additional £15,600,000 of stock; 
and the balance left outstanding, amounting to less thanj 3 \ millions, 
was paid off at par by means of a new loan. The annual saving of 
interest on the stock converted was at first £272,000, increasing to 
£544,000 after seven years. 

For nearly three-quarters of a century no further conversion was 
attempted. In that period the total debt had been increased tenfold, 
and the practice of borrowing in times of war by the issue 
of an inflated capital, bearing nominally a low rate of tS22% 
interest, prevented recourse to conversion as a means of reducing 
the burden after peace was restored. But in 1822 Mr Vansittart — 
who four years earlier had effected a conversion in the opposite 
direction, turning £27,000,000 of stock from 3 inio 3! %, in order to 
obtain from the holders an advance of £3,000,000 without adding to 
the capital of the debt — was able to deal with the 5 %. These stocks 
amounted to £152,000,000 out of a total funded debt of £795,000,000. 
The prices at which the chief denominations of government stocks 
stood in the market in the early part of 1822 indicated a normal rate 
of interest ot more than 4 but considerably less than 4!%. In these 
circumstances, to propose the conversion of the 5 % stocks to 4§ % 
would probably have been futile, unless the new stock were guaran- 
teed for a long period, as holders would have stood in fear of a 
speedy further reduction. Nor could the government hope to suc- 
ceed in a reduction to 4%. Mr Vansittart's plan was to offer £105 
of stock bearing 4 % in exchange for £100 of 5 % stock, thus adding 
slightly tojthe capital of the debt, but effecting a large annual saving 
in interest. These terms were highly successful. Holders of nearly 
£150,000,000 accepted, leaving less than £3,000,000 of the stock to 
be paid off, and the annual saving obtained was £1,197,000. The 
new 4 % stock was made irredeemable for seven years (act 3, Geo. 
IV c-9). 

There were, however, other 4% stocks, amounting to £76,000,000, 
which were not secured against redemption. Two years later, the 
conditions being favourable for their conversion, the act 
5 Geo. IV. c. 2^. was passed, offering holders in exchange 
a 3I % stock, irredeemable for five years. The offer was accepted 
as regards £70,000,000, and^ the remaining £6,000,000 paid off, the 
annual saving on interest being £381,000. 

In 1830 the guarantee given to the 4% stock of 1822 had expired, 
and the stock stood at a price of 102 }. Mr Goulbum decided to 
attempt its conversion without delay, and accordingly by 
the act n Geo. IV. c. 13 holders were offered in exchange 'S30, 
for each £100 of the stock, either £100 of a 3!% stock, irredeemable 
for ten years, or £70 of a 5 % stock, irredeemable for forty-two years, 
these two options being considered of approximately equal value. 
No difficulty was found in securing assent. Over £150,000,000 of the 
stock was converted, almost wholly into the 3!% stock; the balance 
of less than £3,000,000 was paid on, and an annual saving of £754,000 
in interest was the result. 

It was again Mr Goulburn's fortune to carry out a large and 
successful conversion in 1844. At that date the funded debt was 
made up of 3% and $h% stocks in the proportions of 
about two to one, the only other denomination being the ,S44 * 
trifling amount of 5% stock created in connexion with the conver- 
sion of 1830. The price of 3% consols ranged about 98, and that 
of the new 3i%, created in 1830, about 102. A reduction straight- 
way from 3i to 3 % was not to be looked^ for, but it was hoped to 
ensure that reduction ultimately by offering 3} % for the first few 
years and a guarantee against redemption for a long term. Accord- 
ingly the holders of the^ several 3^% stocks were offered an exchange 
to a new stock bearing interest at 3} % for ten years and at 3 % for 
the following twenty years. Practically the whole of the stock, 
amounting to £249,000,000, was converted on these terms, only 
£1 03,000 being left to be paid off at par. The immediate saving of 
interest was £622,000 a year for ten years, and twice that rate in 
subsequent years (acts 7 & 8 Vict. cc. 4 and 5). 

Mr Gladstone's only attempt at the conversion of the debt was 
made in his first year as chancellor of the exchequer. His primary 
purpose was to extinguish some small remnants of 3% 
stocks which stood outside the main stocks of that de- *** 

nomination. The act 16 Vict. c. 23 offered to holders of these 
minor stocks, amounting altogether to about 9} millions, the option 
of exchanging every £100 for either £82, ios. of a 3i % stock guaran- 
teed for 40 years, or £1 10 of a 2 J % stock guaranteed for the same 
period, or else for exchequer bonds at par. In the result stock to the 
amount of only about £1,500,000 was converted, and the remaining 
£8,000,000 had to be paid off at par, with some apparent loss of 
capital, as the current market price of the 3 % was less than par. 
The failure w?s largely owing to the fact that, between the initiation 
and the execution of the scheme, the train of events leading up to 
the Crimean War had become manifest, with unfavourable results 
to the public credit. Mr Gladstone had also included, as an optional 
portion of his plan, liberty to holders of the larger 3% stocks to 
exchange into the new 3J and 2\%. Very little advantage was 
taken of this permission, but the small amount of 2j% stock then 
created has been largely added to in later years by the conversion 
of stocks of higher denominations held by the national debt com- 
missioners for the savings banks and other government funds. 

Little better was the result of a more ambitious attempt made by 
Mr Childers in 1884. His offer (act 47 & 48 Vict. c. 23) extended 
1884 t0 tne holders °f a ^ tne 3% stocks, amounting to more 
than 600 millions, but no attempt was made to compel 
acceptance. There was offered in exchange for each £100 of 3% 
stock either £102 of a stock at 2 J % or £108 of a stock at 2 J %, both 
irredeemable for twenty-one years. But the amount exchanged 
into the new stocks was only 22 millions, of which more than one- 
half was stock held by government departments. 

The most important of all the conversions of the British debt was 
effected by Mr Goschen in 1888. It applied to the whole of the 3 % 
1888* stocks, amounting to a total of £558,000,000, made up as 
follows: £323,000,000 of consols, a stock which dated 
from 1752, when it was formed by the consolidation of a number of 
minor stocks; £69,000,000 of reduced 3%, of which the nucleus 
was the stock reduced from 4 to 3% by Pelham's conversion in 
1749; £166,000,000 of new 3% resulting from the conversion of 
1844. All the three stocks were, and had been for a considerable 
time, well over par. But for the past few years they had remained 
in almost a stationary position, relatively to the upward movement 
shown in the prices of the government 2§% stock, and of the stocks 
of foreign governments, of British colonies and of the leading munici- 
palities. It was clear that the anticipation of a conversion or re- 
demption scheme was weighing down consols. Direct evidence of 
this fact was afforded by the course of a new 3% stock, the local 
loans stock, which Mr Goschen had created in 1887. Though bearing 
the same interest and resting upon the same ultimate security as 
consols, this stock, which had been made irredeemable for twenty- 
five years, rose at once to a higher level of price. The opportunity 
for a great scheme of conversion had evidently come. The risk to 
be incurred by government in undertaking the liability to Day off 
such an enormous body of stock, though less in comparison with the 
resources of the nation than that which Mr Goulburn had faced in 
1844, was still very great, and it was rendered more formidable by 
the fact that holders of consols and of reduced 3 % were entitled 
at law to a year's notice before their stocks could be redeemed. 
If that right of notice were to be enforced as regards any large pro- 
portion of the stocks, no precaution could adequately guard against 
the risk of untoward^ circumstances arising to affect the operation 
before the year expired. Mr Goschen proposed to offer to the 
holders of each of the three stocks an exchange at par into a new 
stock bearing interest at 3% for the first year, at 2j% for the next 
fourteen years and at 2^% for twenty years thereafter, the stock 
to be irredeemable for the whole of that period, namely till 1923. 
Acceptance was made compulsory for holders of the new 3 %, with 
the alternative of being paid off at par, as they had no claim to 
receive notice ; but it was- made optional for the holders of the other 
two stocks, and a bonus of 5s. % was offered to them as an induce- 
ment to forgo their right of notice. These provisions were duly 
embodied in the act 51 Vict. c. 2. The terms were accepted by 
practically all the holders of the new 3 % and by the great majority 
of the holders in consols and reduced 3 s, the amount left outstanding 
being only £42,000,000. To enable that balance to be dealt with, an 
act was passed providing for the compulsory redemption or conver- 
sion of the outstanding stock at the expiry of the statutory notice. 
The funds required for this further operation were raised by the 
issue of treasury bills and exchequer bonds, by temporary advances 
from the bank and from the national debt commissioners, and by the 
creation of an additional half-million of the new stock. In the 
result it was only necessary to find cash for paying off dissentients 
to the_ amount of £19,000,000. The final outcome of the whole 
operation was a saving in the annual charge of interest of £1,412,000, 
increasing to twice that amount after fourteen years. 

The conversion of the consols and reduced 3% was greatly 
facilitated by^ the exercise of a power, which the act conferred, to 
pay to recognized agents, such as stockbrokers, bankers and solicitors, 
a commission of is. 6d. % on stocks in respect of which they lodged 
their clients' assents. These agents were thus afforded an induce- 
ment to give their clients explanation and advice, without which 
many of the fundholders would probably not have moved in the 
matter. The commissions paid amounted to more than £234,000, 
representing stocks to the amount of over £312,000,000. The 
government^ would not again be confronted with this difficulty of 
Raving to give long preliminary notice of the intention to convert 
or redeem a large portion of the debt, as it was provided by the 
Conversion Act 1 888 that the present consols should be redeemable 
after 1923 on such notice and in such manner as parliament might 
direct. (W. Bl.; E. W. H.*) 

See Leroy-Beaulieu, TraitS de la Science des Finances', Rau, 
Finanzwissenschaft; M'CuIIoch, On Taxation and the Funding 
System ; Hamilton, Inquiry concerning the Rise and Progress of the 
English Debt; Taylor, History of Taxation in England; Fenn, 
Compendium of English and Foreign Funds; Dudley Baxter, National 
Debts, and his paper in the Stat. Soc. Jour. (1874). ; Sir E. W. Hamil- 
ton, Conversion and Redemption (1889). And for statistics of national 
debts see the Statesman's Year-Book and the Stock Exchange 
Annual. 


NATIONALITY, a somewhat vague term, used strictly in 
international law (see International Law, Private) for the 
status of membership in a nation or state (for the conditions of 
which see State, Allegiance, Naturalization, Alien), and 
in a more extended sense in political discussion to denote an 
aggregation of persons claiming'to represent a racial, territorial 
or some other bond of unity, though not necessarily recognized 
as an independent political entity. In this latter sense the word 
has often been applied to such people as the Irish, the Armenians 
and the Czechs. A " nationality " in this connexion represents 
a common feeling and an organized claim rather than distinct 
attributes which can be comprised in a strict definition. 


NATIONAL WORKSHOPS (Fr. Ateliers Nationaux), the term 
applied to the workshops established to provide work for the 
unemployed by the French provisional government after the 
revolution of 1848. 1 The political crisis which resulted in the 
abdication of Louis Philippe was naturally followed, in Paris, 
by an acute industrial crisis, and this, following the general 
agricultural and commercial distress which had prevailed through- 
out 1847, rendered the problem of unemployment in Paris very 
acute. The provisional government under the influence of one of 
its members, Louis Blanc, and on the demand of a deputation 
claiming to represent the people passed a decree (Feb. 25, 
1848) from which the following is an extract: — 

The provisional government of the French Republic undertakes 
to guarantee the existence of the workmen by work. It undertakes 
to guarantee work for every citizen. 

For the carrying out of this decree, Louis Blanc wanted the 
formation of a ministry of labour, but this was shelved by his 
colleagues, who as a compromise appointed a government labour 
Commission, under the presidency of Louis Blanc, with power of 
inquiry and consultation only. The carrying out of the decree 
of Feb. 25th was entrusted to the minister of public works, 
M. Marie, and various public works 2 were immediately started. 
The earlier stages of the national works are sufficiently interesting 
to justify the following detailed account: — 

11 The workman first of all obtained a certificate from the landlord 
of his house, or furnished apartments, showing his address, whether 
in Paris or the department of the Seine. This certificate was vis£d 
and stamped by the police commissary of the district. The work- 
man then repaired to the office of the maire of his ward, and, on 
delivering this document, received in exchange a note of admission 
to the national works, bearing his name, residence and calling, and 
enabling him to be received by the director of the workplaces in 
which vacancies existed. All went well while the number of the un- 
employed was less than 6000, but as soon as that number was 
exceeded the workmen of each arrondissement, after having visited 
all the open works in succession without result, returned to their 
maire's offices tired, starving and discontented. The workmen had 
been promised bread when work was not to be had, which was reason- 
able and charitable; the great mistake was, however, then committed 
of giving them money, and distributing it in public at the offices of 
the maires instead of distributing assistance in kind, which might 
have been done so easily through the agency of the bureaux de bien- 
faisance. Each maire s office was authorized to pay every un- 
employed workman 1 -50 f rs. per day on production^ of a ticket 
showing that there was no vacancy for him in the national works. 
The fixed sum of 2 francs was paid to any workman engaged on the 
public excavation work, without regard to his age, the work done 
or his calling. . „ . The workman made the following simple calcu- 
lation, and he made it aloud: * The state gives me 30 sous for doing 
nothing, it pays me 40 sous when I work, so I need only work to the 
extent of 10 sous.' This was logical. . . . 

11 The works opened by the minister of public works being far 
distant from each other, and the workmen not being able to visit 
them all in turn to make certain that there were no vacancies for 
them, two central bureaux were established, one at the Halle-aux- 
Veaux under M. Wissocq, the other near the maire's office in the 

	x The term is also incorrectly applied to the proposed ateliers 
	sociauxoi Louis Blanc (g.fl.), state-supported co-operative productive 
	societies. 

	2 Clearing the trench of Clamart and conveying the earth to Paris 
	for the construction of a railway station on the chemin de fer de 
	l'Ouest; construction of the Paris terminus of the Paris-Chartres 
	railway; improvement of the navigation of the Oise: extension 
	of the Sceaux railway to Orsay. 

5th arrondissement in the Rue'de Bondy, entrusted to M. Higonnet. 
. . . The workmen went to have their tickets examined at one of 
these bureaux; and the absence of employment having been 
proved, they returned to get their 30 sous at their maires' offices/' 1 

Owing to the increase in the number of those claiming work or 
relief, disorganization set in, and both the bureaux and the 
maires became the centres of disturbances, those in charge of the 
offices being unable to control the crowds. As a consequence 
M. Marie commissioned fimile Thomas, a chemist connected 
with the ficole Centrale to reorganize the works. When Thomas 
took the work in hand on the 5th of March, the number of 
unemployed had increased to 14,000 in addition to some 4000 
or 5000 employed on public works, and it was steadily on the 
increase. On the 16th of March the daily pay of the workmen 
who were not working was reduced to 1 franc; work was 
guaranteed for at least every other day, in which case the pay 
was to be 2 francs for the day. The possible usefulness of this 
order was stultified by the near approach of the elections, 
the moderate and extreme sections both trying to exploit the 
•dissatisfied workmen. Private industry, too, was paralysed, 
the workpeople for the most part preferring 1 franc a day and 
idleness, with the possibility of future benefits. Thomas, left 
practically to his own resources, endeavoured to organize some 
special workshops where artisans could be employed at their own 
trades; but it was found almost impossible to persuade them 
to do serious work, as they knew that many of their fellows 
were being paid for loafing. On the 19th of May the number 
enrolled had increased to 87,942. The National Assembly had 
in the meanwhile been elected, and met on the 4th of May. The 
Executive Commission was elected a few days later; Louis Blanc 
was excluded, but all the other members of the provisional 
government were on it. Blanc renewed his motion for a ministry 
of labour; this was rejected. On the 15th the mob invaded the 
Assembly, and from that time the government abated their 
socialist tendencies, and cast about for means to put an end to 
what had become a serious danger to the state as well as an 
exhausting drain on the treasury. On the 24th of May Thomas 
received instructions to dismiss all unmarried men under 25 
years of age who would not enlist in the army, all men who could 
not prove six months' residence in Paris, and all who refused offers 
of private employment. Piece-work was to be established instead 
of time-work, and men were to be prepared to be drafted into the 
provinces. Thomas foretold trouble as a consequence of the 
order, and it was for a time withdrawn. On the 26th of May 
Thomas was superseded by M. Lalanne, and on the 30th the 
National Assembly decreed the substitution of piece-work for 
time-work. On the 20th of June the remainder of the proposals 
were approved, and the sequel was the insurrection of the 23rd 
of June and following days (see French History). How far 
the real socialistic scheme of Louis Blanc would have been 
successful if it had been put in practice must remain a matter of 
speculation. It was entered upon hastily, without any organiza- 
tion, was looked upon coldly by those servants of the govern- 
ment who ought to have assisted it, and, in the circumstances, 
was foredoomed to failure from the start. 

Authorities. — E. Thomas, Histoire des ateliers nationaux (1848) ; 
L. Blanc, Histoire de la revolution franqaise de 1848 (1870-1880); 
1848 Hist, revelations (1858) ; A. de Lamartine, Hist, de la revolution 
de 1848 (1849); a useful summary is given in theEnglish Board of 
Trade Report on Agencies and Metfwdsfor dealing with the Unemployed 
(c. 7182, 1893). 


NATROLITE, a mineral species belonging to the zeolite group. 
It is a hydratcd sodium and aluminium silicate with the formula 
Na2Al2Si30io*2H 2 0, and containing sodium (Na20, 16-3%), 
was named natrolite by M. H. Klaproth in 1803. " Needle- 
stone " or " needle- zeolite " are other names, alluding to the 
common acicular habit of the crystals, which are often very 
slender and are aggregated in divergent tufts. Larger crystals 
have the form of a square prism terminated by a low pyramid : 
the prism angle being nearly a right angle (88° 4$¥), tne crystals 
are tetragonal in appearance, though actually orthorhombic. 
There are perfect cleavages parallel to the faces of the prism. 
1 E. Thomas, Histoire des ateliers nationaux, p. 29. 

The mineral also often occurs in compact fibrous aggregates, 
the fibres having a divergent or radial arrangement (hence the 
name radiolite for one variety). From other fibrous zeolites 
natrolite is readily distinguished by its optical characters: 
between crossed nicols the fibres extinguish parallel to .their 
length, and they do not show an optic figure in convergent 
polarized light. Natrolite is usually white or colourless, but some- 
times reddish or yellowish. The lustre is vitreous, or in finely 
fibrous specimens sometimes silky. The spec. grav. is 2-2, 
and the hardness 5^. The mineral is readily fusible, melting in 
a candle-flame, to which it imparts a yellow colour owing to the 
presence of sodium. It is decomposed by hydrochloric acid 
with separation of gelatinous silica. 

Natrojite occurs with other zeolites in the amygdaloidal cavities 
of basic igneous rocks. The best specimens are the diverging groups 
of white prismatic crystals found in compact basalt at the Puy-ae- 
Marman, Puy-de D6me, France. The largest crystals are those from 
Brevig in Norway. The walls of cavities in the basalt of the Giant's 
Causeway, in Co. Antrim, are frequently encrusted with slender 
needles of natrolite, and similar material is found abundantly in the 
volcanic rocks (basalt and phonolite) of Salesel, Aussig and several 
other places in the north of Bohemia. 

Several varieties of natrolite have been distinguished by special 
names. Fargite is a red natrolite from Glenfarg in Perthshire. 
Bergmannite or Spreustein is an impure variety which has resulted 
by the alteration of other minerals, chiefly sodalite, in the augite- 
syenite of southern Norway. 


NATTIER, JEAN MARC (1685-1766), French painter, was 
born in Paris in 1 685, the son of Marc Nattier, a portrait painter, 
and of Marie Court ois, a miniaturist. He received his first 
instruction from his father, and having applied himself to copying 
pictures at the Luxembourg Gallery, he refused to proceed to 
the French Academy in Rome, though he had taken the first 
prize at the Paris Academy at the age of fifteen. In 171 5 he 
went to Amsterdam, where Peter the Great was then staying, 
and painted portraits of the tsar and the empress Catherine, but 
declined an offer to go to Russia. Between 17 15 and 1720 he 
devoted himself to compositions like the " Battle of Pultawa," 
which he painted for Peter the Great, and the " Petrification of 
Phineus and of his Companions," which led to his election to 
the Academy. The financial collapse of 1720 caused by the 
schemes of Law all but ruined Nattier, who found himself forced 
to devote his whole energy to portraiture. He became the 
painter of the artificial ladies of Louis XYVs court. The most 
notable examples of his straightfprward portraiture are the 
" Marie Leczinska " at the Dijon Museum, and a group of the 
artist surrounded by his family, dated 1730. He died in Paris 
in 1 766. Many of his pictures are in the public collections of 
France. Thus at the Louvre is his " Magdalen "; at Nantes the 
portrait of " La Camargo " and " A Lady of the Court of Louis 
XV." At Orleans a " Head of a Young Girl," at Marseilles a 
portrait of " Mme de Pompadour," at Perpignan a portrait of 
"'Louis XV., " and at Valenciennes a portrait of " Le Due de 
BoufHers." The Versailles Museum owns an important group of 
two ladies, and the Dresden Gallery a portrait of the " Marechal 
de Saxe." At the Wallace collection Nattier is represented by 
" The Comtesse de Dillieres," " The Bath (Mdlle de Clermont)," 
" Portrait of a Lady in Blue," " Marie Leczinska " and " A 
Prince of the House of France." In the collection of Mr Lionel 
Phillips are the duchess of Flavacourt as " Le Silence" and the 
duchess of Chateauroux as " Le Point du jour" A portrait of 
the " Comtesse de Neubourg and her Daughter " formed part 
of the Vaile Collection, and realized 4500 gs. at the sale of this 
collection in 1903. Nattier's works have been engraved by 
Leroy, Tardieu, Lepicie, Audran, Dupin and many other noted 
craftsmen. 

See " J. M. Nattier," by Paul Mantz, in the Gazette des beaux-arts 
(1894); Life of Nattier, by his daughter, Madame Tocque; Nattier, 
by Pierre de Nolhac (1904, revised 1910); and French Painters of 
theXVIIIth Century, by Lady Dilke (London, 1899). 


NATURAL BRIDGE, a small village of Rockbridge county, 
Virginia, in the western part of the state, 179 m. by rail \V. of 
Richmond, and about 16 m. S.E. of Lexington, the county-seat. 
It is served by the Chesapeake & Ohio and the Norfolk & Western 
railways. In the vicinity of the village, which is about 1500 ft. 
above sea-level, is the great natural curiosity from which it 
derives its name — a bridge of natural rock 90 ft. long and from 
50 to 150 ft. wide, which spans Cedar Creek at a height of 215 ft. 
above that stream. It consists of horizontal limestone strata, 
and is the remains of the roof of a cave or underground tunnel 
through which the creek once flowed. It is crossed by a public 
road. In the village are magnesia and Iithia springs and a salt- 
petre cave, which was worked during the War of 18 12 and the 
Civil War. A royal grant dated the 5th of July 1774 conveyed to 
Thomas Jefferson a tract of 157 acres, " including the Natural 
Bridge on Cedar Creek," and it did not pass from his estate until 
1833. 


NATURAL GAS, the name given to the inflammable gas occur- 
ring in petroliferous formations. It consists mainly of hydro- 
carbons of the paraffin series, principally marsh gas, which 
constitutes from 50 to 90 % of the Pennsylvanian gas. Members 
of the olefine series are also present, especially in the gas of Baku. 
Varying amounts of carbon dioxide, sometimes as much as 10% 
or more, and small quantities of carbon monoxide, nitrogen, 
hydrogen and oxygen are also found. For particulars of the 
geological occurrence, and the collection and distribution, of 
natural gas, see Petroleum. 


NATURALISM. " Nature " is a term of very uncertain 
extent, and the " natural " has accordingly several antitheses, 
often more or less conflicting, and only to be learnt from the 
context in which they occur. Thus, though Man and the World 
are often opposed as respectively subject and object, yet the 
word nature is applied to both: hence Naturalism is used in 
both a subjective and an objective sense. In the subjective 
sense the natural, as the original or essential, is opposed to what 
is acquired, artificial, conventional or accidental. On this 
opposition the casuistry and paradoxes of the Sophists largely 
turned; it determined also, at least negatively, the conduct of 
the Cynics in their contempt for the customary duties and 
decencies; and it led the Stoics to seek positive rules of life in 
" conformity to nature." This deference for the " natural " 
generally, and distrust of traditional systems of thought and 
«ven of traditional institutions, has played a large part in 
modern philosophy, especially British philosophy. It was 
perhaps the inevitable outcome of the reaction, which began 
with the Renaissance, against the medieval domination of mere 
authority. " L'homme qui medite est un animal depraveV' 
said Rousseau; and again, " Tout est bien sortant des mains de 
Fauteur des choses,tout degenere entre les mains de Fhomme." 1 
' In psychology and epistemology, " no one," as Green has said, 
" is more emphatic than Locke in opposing what is real to what 
we ' make for ourselves ' — the work of nature to the work of the 
mind. Simple ideas or sensations we certainly do not ' make 
for ourselves.' They therefore, and matter supposed to cause 
them, are, according to Locke, real. But relations are neither 
simple ideas nor their material archetypes. They therefore, 
as Locke explicitly holds, fall under the head of the work of the 
mind, which is opposed to the real." 2 This opposition again led 
Hume, in the first place, to distinguish between natural and 
philosophical relations — the former determined simply by associa- 
tion, the latter by an abitrary union of two ideas, which we 
may think proper tc compare — and then, in the next, to reduce 
identity and causality, the two chief " philosophical relations," 
to fictions resulting from " natural relations," that i%to say, from 
associations of similarity and contiguity. Subjective naturalism 
thus tended to become, and in the end became, what is more 
commonly called Sensationalism or Associationism, thereby 
approximating towards that objective naturalism which reduces 
the external world to a mechanism describable in terms of matter 
and motion — a result already foreshadowed when Hartley 
connected ideas and their association with brain vibrations and 
vibratiuncles. In ethics, also, the striving to get back to the 
natural entailed a similar downward trend. From the Cambridge 
Platonists, from Locke and Clarke, we hear much of rational 

	1 Quoted by Eisler, Worterbuch der philosophischen Begriffe (1899), 
	s.v. " NaturaHsmus." 

	* T. H. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics (1883), § 20. 

principles of conduct, comparable in respect of intelligibility 
with the truths of mathematics; but already we find that in 
Shaftesbury the centre of ethical interest is transferred from the 
Reason, conceived as apprehending either abstract moral dis- 
tinctions or laws of divine legislation, to the " natural affections " 
that prompt to social duty; 3 and when we reach Bentham, 
with pleasure and pain as " sovereign masters," and the Mills, 
with love of virtue explained by the laws of association, all 
seems to be non-rational. 4 There is much resemblance, as well 
as some historical connexion, between the naturalism of moralists 
such as Shaftesbury and Hutcheson and the Common-Sense 
metaphysics of Reid and his school. 6 Hence Kant, distinguishing 
between a " naturalistic " and " scientific " or critical method 
in metaphysics, styles Reid and his followers " naturalists of pure 
reason," satirically comparing them to people who think they can 
settle the size and distance of the moon by direct eyesight better 
than by the roundabout calculations of mathematics. 

So far we have seen the natural approximating to the non- 
rational. But when used in a subjective sense in opposition to 
the supernatural, it means the rational as opposed to what is 
above reason, or even contrary to reason. It is in this sense that 
the term Naturalism most frequently occurs; and it was so 
applied specially to the doctrines of the English Deists and the 
German Illuminati of the 17th and 18th centuries: those of 
them who held that human reason alone was capable of attaining 
to the knowledge of God were called theological naturalists 
or rationalists, while those who denied the possibility of revela- 
tion altogether were called philosophical naturalists or naturalists 
simply. 6 In these controversies the term Naturalist was also 
sometimes used in an objective sense for those who identified 
God and Nature, but they were more frequently styled Spinozists, 
Pantheists or even Atheists. But it is at once obvious that 
dispute as to what is natural and what supernatural is vain and 
hopeless till the meanings of reason and nature are clearly defined. 
" The onlydistinct meaning of the word " [natural], said Butler, 
" is stated, fixed or settled; since what is natural as much requires 
and presupposes an intelligent agent to render it so, i.e. to effect 
it continually, or at stated times, as what is supernatural or 
miraculous does to effect it for once. And from hence it must 
follow that persons' notion of what is natural will be enlarged 
in proportion to their greater knowledge. . . . Nor is there any 
absurdity in supposing that there may he beings in the universe, 
whose capacities . . . may be so extensive, as that the whole 
Christian dispensation may to them appear natural, i.e. analogous 
or conformable to God's dealings with other parts of His creation; 
as natural as the visible known course of things appears to us." 7 

The antithesis of natural to spiritual (or ideal) has mainly 
determined the use of the term Naturalism in the present 
day.^ But current naturalism is not to be called materialism, 
though these terms are often used synonymously, as by Hegel, 
Ueberweg and other historians of philosophy; nor yet pan- 
theism, if by that is meant the immanence of all things in one 
God. We know only material phenomena, it is said; matter is 
an abstract conception simply, not a substantial reality. It is 
therefore meaningless to describe mind as its effect.. Moreover, 
mind also is but an abstract conception; and here again all 
our knowledge is confined to the phenomenal. To identify the 
two classes of phenomena is, however, impossible, and indeed 
absurd; nevertheless we find a constant concomitance of 
psychosis and neurosis; and the more sensationalist and associa- 
tionist our psychology, the easier it becomes to correlate the 

	8 Cf. Sidgwick, History of Ethics (1886), p. 181. 

	4 Cf. W. R. Sorley, The Ethics of Naturalism (1885), pp. 16 sqq. 

	6 Cf. W. R. Scott, Francis Itutcheson; his Life, Teaching and 
	Position in Philosophy (1900), pp. 121, 265 seq. 

	6 See Rationalism; Kant, Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der 
	Uossen Vernunft, Hartenstein's edition, vi. 253; and Lechler, Gt- 
	schichte des EngliscJien Deismus (1841), pp. 454 sqq. 
	^Analogy, part i. chap. i. end. Cf. also J. S. Mill, Logic, book 
	111. chap. xxv. § 2, and Essays on Religion. 

	8 In aesthetics we find Naturalism used in a cognate sense: the 
	Flemish painters, such writers as Flaubert or Zola, for example, being 
	called naturalistic or realistic, in contrast to the Italian painters or 
	writers like George Sand or the Brontes. 

psychical and the physical as but " two aspects " of one and the 
same fact. It is therefore simplest and sufficient to assume an 
underlying, albeit unknown, unity connecting the two. A 
monism — so far neutral, neither materialistic nor spiritualistic — 
is thus a characteristic of the prevailing naturalism. But when 
the question arises, how best to systematize experience as a 
whole, it is contended that we must begin from the physical side. 
Here we have precise conceptions, quantitative exactness and 
thoroughgoing continuity; every thought that has ever stirred 
the hearts of men, not less than every breeze that has ever 
rippled the face of the deep, has meant a perfectly definite re- 
distribution of matter and motion. To the mechanical principles 
of this redistribution an ultimate analysis brings us down; 
and — beginning from these — the nebular hypothesis and the 
theory of natural selection will enable us to explain all subsequent 
synthesis. 1 Life and mind now clearly take a secondary place; 
the cosmical mechanism determines them, while they are powerless 
to modify it. The spiritual becomes the " epiphenomenal," a 
merely incidental phosphorescence, so to say, that regularly 
accompanies physical processes of a certain type and complexity. 
(See also Psychology.) 

This absolute naturalism, as we may call it, the union, that 
is, of psychological and cosmolegical naturalism, is in fact a 
species of Fatalism, as Kant indeed entitled it. 2 It is the logical 
outcome of a sensationalist psychology, and of the epistemology 
which this entails. As long as association of ideas (or sensory 
residua) is held to explain judgment and conscience, so long may 
naturalism stand. 

The naturalistic work of chief account at the present day is 
E. Haeckel's Die Weltratsel, gemeinverstandtiche Studien fiber 
monistische Philosophie (5th ed., 1900), of which an English trans- 
lation has appeared. Effective refutations will be found in the works 
of two of Haeckel's colleagues, O. Liebmann, Zur Analysis der 
Wirklichkeit (3rd ed., 1900) ; R. Eucken, Die Einheit des Geisteslebens 
in Bewusstsein und That der Menschheit (1888, Eng. trans.); Der 
Kampf um einen geisligen Lebensinhalt (1898). See also A. J. 
Balfour, Foundations of Belief (8th ed., 1901); J. Ward, Naturalism 
and Agnosticism (1899). (J. W.*) 


NATURALIZATION, the term given in law to the acquisition 
by an alien of the national character or citizenship of a certain 
state, always with the consent of that state and of himself, 
but not necessarily with the consent of the state to which he 
previously belonged, which may refuse to its subjects the right 
of renouncing its nationality, called il expatriation," or may 
allow the right only on conditions which have not been fulfilled 
in the particular case. Hence although nationality in strict 
theory is always single, as liege homage was and allegiance in its 
proper sense is, it often happens that two states claim the same 
person as their national or subject. This conflict arises not only 
from naturalization having, been granted without the corre- 
sponding expatriation having been permitted, but also from the 
fact that birth on the soil was the leading determinant of nation- 
ality by feudal law, and still is so by the laws of England and the 
United States (jus soli), while the nationality of the father is its 
leading determinant in those countries which have accepted 
Roman principles of jurisprudence (jus sanguinis). The conflict 
is usually solved for practical purposes by an understanding 
which is approximately general, namely that, in cases not pro- 
vided for by treaty, no state shall protect those whom it claims 
as its nationals while residing in the territory of another state 
which claims them as its own nationals by any title, whether 
jus soli, jus sanguinis, naturalization, or the refusal to allow 
expatriation. On this footing the British foreign office, while 
it grants passports for travel to naturalized persons, will extend 
no protection to them against a claim of their former country, if 
they return to it, to exact military service due to it. The United 
States, asserting that expatriation is an inalienable right of man, 
maintains that, to lose his right to American protection, the 
emigrant who has been naturalized in the United States must 
have done that for which he might have been tried and punished 
at the moment of his departure; it claims to protect him against 
the exaction of what at that moment was merely a future liability 

	1 Cf. Spencer, First Principles (1867), p. 398. 

	1 Cf. Prolegomena, § 60. 

to military service, and this doctrine has been practically accepted 
by France in her dealings with America. Germany also accepted 
it by the treaty of 1868 between the United States and the 
North German Confederation, now in force for the German 
empire, subject to provisions that the emigrant's fixing his 
domicile in the old country shall be deemed a renunciation 
of his naturalization in the new, and that his living in the old 
country for more than two years may be deemed to imply the 
absence of an intention to return to the new. Between the 
United States and Great Britain the convention of the 13th of 
May 1870 provides that naturalization in either is to be valid 
for all purposes immediately on its completion, but that if the 
resident shall renew his residence in his old country he may be 
readmitted to his old nationality, on his application and on such 
conditions as the readmitting government may impose. 

The Naturalization Act 1870, which now governs the matter 
for England, does not say that the person naturalized becomes 
thereby a British subject, to which, if it had been said, a proviso 
might have been added saving the above-mentioned policy of 
the foreign office as to not protecting him in his old country, 
although even without such a proviso the foreign office would 
have been free to follow that policy. The act in question (s. 7) 
gives him the rights and imposes on him the duties of a natural- 
born British subject in the United Kingdom, and provides that, 
when within the limits of his old country, he shall not be deemed 
a British subject unless he has ceased to be a subject of that 
country, by its laws or in pursuance of a treaty. On this wording 
it has been maintained that British naturalization is not really 
naturalization at all; but leaves the naturalized person as he 
was with the addition of a certain quality within the United 
Kingdom; and on that ground it has been considered in France 
that a Frenchman, obtaining naturalization in England, does not 
fall within the French law (Code Civil, Art. 17) which pronounces 
the expatriation of citizens who cause themselves to be naturalized 
abroad. This is the Bourgoise Case, 41 Ch. D. 310, in which, 
when it came before the English courts, Mr Justice Kay inclined 
to the same view, but the court of appeal avoided giving an 
opinion on the point. Professor Dicey leans to the same view 
(5 Law Quarterly Review, 438) ; but Sir Thomas Barclay (4 L.Q.R. 
226), Sir Malcolm Mcllwraith (6 L.Q.R. 379), and Professor West- 
lake ' (International Law — Peace, 2nd ed. p. 234; Private Inter- 
national Law, 4th ed. p. 356) adopt the view that the Naturaliza- 
tion Act 1870 makes the naturalized person a full British subject, 
only to be treated in his old country in accordance with the 
international principles recognized by the British executive. 
And the foreign office, by granting passports to naturalized 
persons, acts on the same view. The point is important with 
reference to the question whether the naturalization of the father 
in the United Kingdom confers the character of British subjects 
on his children afterwards born abroad. (See Alien.) 

An analogous question arises on the provision in the Naturaliza- 
tion Act 1870, sec. 16, that the legislature of any British posses- 
sion may make laws " for imparting to any person the privileges 
of naturalization, to be enjoyed by such person within the limits 
of such possession." This, in accordance with the wider view 
of the effect of naturalization in the United Kingdom, may mean 
that naturalization in pursuance of a colonial law confers the 
full character of a British subject, only without removing 
disabilities, such as that to hold land, under which the naturalized 
person may have lain as an alien in any other British possession. 
On that footing the foreign office grants passports to the holders 
of colonial certificates of naturalization, and protects them in all 
foreign countries but that of their origin; and the Merchant 
Shipping Act 1894, sec. 1, allows persons naturalized in British 
possessions to be owners of British ships. On the other hand, 
those who maintain the narrower view of the effect of natural- 
ization in the United Kingdom naturally hold that colonial 
naturalization has no effect at all outside the British possession 
in which it is granted. 

Naturalization in India is regulated by the British Indian 
Naturalization Act, No. 30 of 1852, under which it may be 
granted to subjects of the several princes and states in India 
as well as to those who are entirely aliens to the British empire. 
The former, however, are treated for several purposes as British 
subjects even without being so naturalized. 

In most countries a lengthened sojourn is a condition precedent 
to naturalization. In Belgium, the United Kingdom, North 
America and Russia the period of such sojourn is fixed at five 
years, in France, Greece and Sweden at three, in the Argentine 
Republic two, while in Portugal a residence of one year is 
sufficient. In Germany, Austria and Italy no period of residence 
is prescribed, while in Austria a ten years' residence confers 
per se the rights of citizenship. In the United States an alien 
desiring to be naturalized must declare on oath his intention 
to become a citizen of the United States; two years afterwards 
must declare on oath his intention to support the constitution 
of the United States and renounce allegiance to every foreign 
power, including that of which he was before a subject; must 
prove residence in the United States for five years, and in the 
state where his application is made for one year, as a good 
citizen; and must renounce any title of nobility. In France 
an alien desiring naturalization, if he has not resided continuously 
in the country for ten years, must obtain permission to establish 
his domicile in France; three years after (in special cases one 
year) he is entitled to apply for naturalization, which involves 
the renunciation of any existing allegiance. 

See further, Allegiance, International Law (Private); also 
Bar, Private International Law (Gillespie's translation); Hansard, 
Law relating to Aliens; Cutler, Law of Naturalization; Cockburn, 
Nationality; Cogordan, Nationalite; Heffter, Europdisches Volker- 
recht ; Hall, Foreign Jurisdiction of the British Crown ; Westlakc, 
International Law — Peace, and Private International Law (4th ed.). 

(Jno. W.) 


NAUARCHIA (Gr. vavs, ship, &pxv> command), the supreme 
command of the Spartan navy. The office was an annual one 
and could not be held more than once by the same man (Xen. 
Hell. ii. 1. 7). This law might be evaded in special cases; the 
new admiral might not be sent to take over the command until 
some time after his election, which took place at midsummer 
(Beloch in Pkilologus, xliii. p. 272 sqq.), and meanwhile his pre- 
decessor remained de facto admiral; or the retiring admiral 
might, after the expiry of his term, hold an appointment as 
secretary (eiriGTo'Kevs) to one who, though titular admiral, 
was really placed under his orders or even kept at Sparta alto- 
gether. Being independent of the kings and hampered by no 
colleague, the nauarch wielded such power that Aristotle is 
hardly going too far when he says (Politics , ii. 9. 22), rj vavapxlo. 
cxeddv irkpa fiaaiKela KaOearqicev. He was subject only to the 
ephors, who, if he proved incompetent, could depose him (Thuc. 
viii. 39), though they usually preferred to send out an advisory 
committee (aifxpovKoi). An admiral might appoint his emarokevs 
to command a portion, or even the whole, of the fleet, and if 
the former died in office the secretary succeeded to his post. 

For a detailed discussion see J. Beloch, " Die Nauarchie in Sparta," 
in the Rheinisches Museum, xxxiv. (1879)^117-130, where a complete 
list of nauarchs known to us will be found; regarding the time of 
the election this is corrected by a later article of the same writer 
(Philologus, loc. ciL). See also A. Solari, Ricerche Spartane 
(Livorno, 1907), 1-58; G. Busolt, " Staats- und Rechtsaltertumer " 
(lwan M tiller's Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, iv.), 
§ 96; G. E. Underbill's edition of Xenophon, HeUenica, i., ii., note 
oni. 5. 1. (M. N.T.) 


NAUCK, JOHANN AUGUST (1822-1892), German classical 
scholar and critic, was born at Auerstadt in Prussian Saxony 
on the 18th of September 1822. After having studied at Halle 
and held educational posts in Berlin, he migrated in 1859 to 
St Petersburg, where he was professor of Greek at the imperial 
historico-philological institute (1860-1883). He died on the 
3rd of August 1892. Nauck was one of the most distinguished 
textual critics of his day, although, like P. H. Peerlkamp, he 
was fond of altering a text in accordance with what he thought 
the author must, or ought to, have written. 

The most important of his writings, all of which deal with Greek 
language and literature (especially the tragedians) are the following: 
Euripides, Tragedies and Fragments (1854, 3rd ed., 1871); Studta 
Euripidea (1859-1862); Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta (1856, 
last ed„ 1889), his chief work; Index to the Fragments (1892); 
text of Sophocles (1867); revised edition of Schncidewin's annotated 
Sophocles (1856, &c); texts of Homer, Odyssey (1874) and Iliad 
(1877-1879); the fragments of Aristophanes of Byzantium (1848), 
still indispensable; Porphyrius of Tyre (i860, 2nd ed., 1886); 
Iamblichus, De VitaPytJiagorica (1884) ; Lexikon Vindobonense (1867), 
a meagre compilation of the 14th or 15th century. See memoir 
by T. Zielinski, in Bursian's Biographisches Jahrbuch (1894), and J. E. 
Sandys, History of Classical Scholarship, iii. (1908), pp. 149-152. 


NAUCRARY, a subdivision of the people of Attica, which 
was certainly among the most primitive in the Athenian state. 
The word is derived either (1) from vavs (a ship) and describes 
the duty imposed upon each naucrary, of providing one ship 
and two (or, more probably, ten) horsemen; or (2) from 
valav (to dwell), in which case it has to do with a householder 
census. The former is generally accepted in view of the fact 
that the naucraries were certainly the units on, which the Athenian 
fleet was based. The view once held (on the strength of a 
fragment of Aristotle, quoted carelessly by Photius) that the 
naucrary was invented by Solon may now be regarded as obsolete 
(see the Aristotelian Constitution, viii. 3). Each of the four 
Ionian tribes was divided into three trittyes (" thirds "), each 
of which was subdivided into four naucraries; there were 
thus 48 naucraries. The earliest mention of them is in Herodotus 
(v. 71), where it is stated that the Cylonian conspiracy was 
put down by the " Prytaneis (chief men) of the Naucraries." 
Although it is generally recognized that in this passage we can 
trace an attempt to shift the responsibility for the murder of 
the suppliants from the archon Megacles, it is highly improbable 
that the Prytaneis of the Naucraries did not play a part in the 
tragedy. Thucydides is probably right, as against Herodotus, in 
asserting that the nine archons formed the Athenian executive at 
this period. It may be conjectured, however, that the military 
forces of Athens were organized on the basis of the naucraries, 
and that it was the duty of the presidents of these districts 
to raise the local levies. It is certainly remarkable that the 
Aristotelian Constitution of Athens does not connect the naucrary 
with the fleet or the army; from chapter viii. it would appear 
that its importance was chiefly in connexion with finance 
{apxh Ttrarnikvq Tpos re to\s ela<f>opas ical t(L$ 6aw6.vas). The 
naucrary consisted of a number of villages, and was, therefore, 
a local unit very much in the power of the naucraros, who was 
selected by reason of wealth. The naucraros superintended 
the construction of, and afterwards captained, the ship, and 
also assessed and administered the taxes in his own area. In 
the reforms of Cleisthenes, the naucraries gave place to the 
demes as the political unit. In accordance with the new decimal 
system, their number was increased to fifty. Whether they 
continued (and if so, how long) to supply one ship and two ' (or 
ten) horsemen each is not certainly known. Cheidemus in 
Photius asserts that they did, and his statement is to a certain 
extent corroborated by Herodotus *(vi. 89) who records that, 
in the Aeginetan War before the Persian Invasion, the Athenian 
fleet numbered only fifty sail. 

See Photius (s.v.), who is clearly using the Ath. Pol. (he quotes 
from it the last part of his article totidem verbis); Schomann, 
Antiq. (p. 326, Eng. trans.) — quoted by J. E. Sandys (Ath. Pol. viii., 
13) — retutes Gilbert, Greek Constitutional Antiquities (Eng. trans., 
1895), and in Jahrb. Class. Phil. cxi. (1875) PP- 9 se Q-J A'. H. J. 
Greenidge, Handbook of Greek Const. Hist. p. 134; history of Greece 
in general; for derivation of name, G. Meyer, Curtius' Studien (vii. 
175), where Wecklein is refuted. (J. M. M.) 

NAUCRATIS, an ancient Greek settlement in Egypt. The 
site was discovered by Professor W. M. Flinders Petrie in 1884, 
on the eastern bank of a canal, about 10 m. W. of the present 
Rosetta branch of the Nile. In ancient times it was approached 
by the Canopic mouth, which was farther to the west. The 
identification of the site is placed beyond doubt by the discovery 
of inscriptions, with the name of the town, and of great masses 
of early Greek pottery, such as could not have existed anywhere 
else. The site was excavated in 1884-1886 by the Egypt Ex- 
ploration Fund, and a supplementary excavation was made by 
the British School at Athens in 1899. A list of the temples of 
Naucratis is given by Herodotus (ii. 178); they were the 
Hellenion, common to all the colonizing cities, and those dedicated 

	1 See footnote to Cleisthenes (i), ad fin. 

by the Aeginetans to Zeus, by the Samians to Hera, and by the 
Milesians to Apollo. A temple of Aphrodite is also mentioned 
by Athenaeus. Traces of all these temples, except that of 
Zeus, or at least dedications coming from them, have been found 
in the excavations, and another has been added to them, the 
temple of the Dioscuri. The two chief sites to be cleared were 
the temples of Apollo and of Aphrodite, in both of which succes- 
sive buildings of various date were found. Both were remarkable 
for the great mass of early painted pottery that was found; 
in the temple of Apollo this had been buried in a trench; in 
that of Aphrodite it was scattered over the whole surface in 
two distinct strata. A great deal of it was local ware, but there 
were also imported vases from various Greek sites. In addition 
to these temples, there was also found a great fortified enclosure, 
about 860 ft. by 750, in the south-eastern part of the town; 
within it was a square tower or fort; a portico of entrance and 
an avenue of rows of sphinxes was added in Ptolemaic times, 
as is shown by the foundation deposits found at the corners 
of the portico; these consisted of models of the tools and materials 
used in the buildings, models of instruments for sacrifice or 
ceremonies, and cartouches of King Ptolemy Philadelphus. 
Professor Petrie naturally supposed this great enclosure to be 
the Hellenion or common sanctuary of the Greeks, but Mr. 
Hogarth subsequently found traces of another great walled 
enclosure to the north-east of the town, together with pottery 
dedica ted rots robv^EWrjvwv 0eots,and he claims with reason that 
this enclosure is more likely than the other to be the Hellenion, 
since no early Greek antiquities have been found in the southern 
part of the town, which seems rather to have been a native 
settlement. The cemetery of the ancient town was found 
on two low mounds to the north, but was mostly of Ptolemaic 
date. 

Apart from the historic interest of the site, as the only Greek 
colony in Egypt in early times, the chief importance of the 
excavations lies in the rich finds of early pottery and in the 
inscriptions upon them, which throw light on the early history 
of the alphabet. The most flourishing period of the town was 
from the accession of Amasis II. in 570 B.c to the Persian 
invasion of 520 B.C., when the contents of the temples must 
have been destroyed. The earlier chronology has been much 
disputed. There are clear traces of a settlement going back 
to the 7th century, including a scarab factory, which yielded 
numerous scarabs, not of native Egyptian manufacture, bearing 
the names of the kings that preceded Amasis. Among these 
were fragments of early Greek pottery. It seems a fair inference 
that the makers of these were Greeks, and that they probably 
represent the early Milesian colony, settled here in the time 
of Psammetichus I., before the official assignment of the site 
by Amasis to the Greek colonists of various cities. The most 
important of the antiquities found are now in the British Museum. 

See W. M. F. Petrie, &c, Naukratis /., third Memoir of the Egypt 
Exploration Fund (1886); E. A. Gardner, &c. t Naukratis II., sixth 
Memoir of same (1889); D. G. Hogarth, &c, Annual of the British 
School at Athens (1898-1899). (E. Gr.) 


NAUDE, GABRIEL (1600-1653), French librarian and scholar, 
was born in Paris on the 2nd of February 1600. He studied 
medicine at Paris and Padua, and became physician to 
Louis XIII. In 1629 he became librarian to Cardinal Bagni at 
Rome, and on Bagni's death in 1641 librarian to Cardinal 
Barberini. At the desire of Richelieu he began a wearisome 
controversy with the Benedictines, denying Gerson's authorship 
of De Imitalione Christu Richelieu intended to make Naude 
his librarian, and on his death Naude accepted a similar offer on 
the part of Mazarin, and for the next ten years devoted himself 
to bringing together from all parts of Europe the noble assemblage 
of books known as the Bibliotheque Mazarine. Mazarin's 
library was sold by the parlement of Paris during the troubles 
of the Fronde, and Queen Christina invited Naude to Stockholm. 
He was not happy in Sweden, and on Mazarin 's appeal that he 
should re-form his scattered library Naude returned at once. 
But his health was broken, and he died on the journey at Abbe- 
ville on the 30th of July 1653. The friend of Gui Patin, of Pierre 
Gassendi and all the liberal thinkers of his time, Naude was no 
mere bookworm; his books show traces of the critical spirit 
which made him a worthy colleague of the humorists and 
scholars who prepared the way for the better known writers of 
the " siecle de Louis XIV." 

Including works edited by him, a list of ninety-two pieces is 
given in the Noudaeana. The chief are Le Marfore, on discours 
contre les libeUes (Paris, 1620), very rare, reprinted 1868; Instruction 
a la France sur la virile de Vhistoire des Frhres]de la Roze-Croix 
(1623, 1624), displaying their impostures; Apologie pour tons les 
grands personnages faussement soupgonnez de magie (1625, 1652, 
1669, 1712), Pythagoras, Socrates, Thomas Aquinas and Solomon 
are among those defended; Advis pour dresser une bibliotheque (1627, 
J 644, 1676; translated by J. Evelyn, 1661), full of sound and liberal 
views on librarianship ; Addition d, Vhistoire de Louys XI. (1630), 
this includes an account of the origin of printing; Bibliographia 
toolitica (Venice, 1633, &c; in French, 1642), a mere essay or no 
bibliographical value; De studio liberali syntagma (1632, 1654), a 
practical treatise found in most collections of directions for studies; 
De studio militari syntagma (1637), esteemed in its day; Considera- 
tions politiques sur les coups d'etat (Rome [Paris], 1639; first edition 
rare, augmented by Dumay, 1752), this contains an apology for the 
massacre of St Bartholomew; Biblioth. Cordesianae Catalogue (1643), 
classified; Jugement de taut ce qui a Ste itnprime contre le Card. 
Mazarin (1649), Naude's best work, and one of the ablest defences 
of Mazarin ; it is written in the form of a dialogue between Saint- 
Ange and Mascurat, and is usually known under the name of the 
latter. 

Authorities. — L. Jacob, G. Naudaei tumulus (1659); P. Halle, 
Elogium Naudaei (1661); Niceron, Memoir es, vol. ix.; L. Jacob, 
Traicte des plus belles bibliotheques (1644); Gui Patin, Lettres (1846); 
Noudaeana et Patiniana (1703); Sainte-Beuve, Portraits LitL 
vol. ii.; A. Franklin, Histoire de la BibL Mazarine (1860). 


NAUGATUCK, a township and borough of New Haven 
county, Connecticut, U.S.A., on the Naugatuck river, 5 m. S. 
of Waterbury, with an area of 17 sq. m. in 1006. Pop. (1800) 
6218, (1900) 10,541, of whom 3432 were foreign-born, (1910 
census) 12,722. It is served by the New York, New Haven 
& Hartford railroad and by interurban electric railways. 
Among the principal pubtic buildings are the Whittemore 
Memorial Public Library (1892), a fine high school and the 
large Salem school (part of the public school system), all given 
to the borough by John Howard Whittemore of Naugatuck, 
who in addition endowed the library and the high school. The 
river furnishes water-power. Among the manufactures are 
rubber goods, chemicals, iron castings, woollen goods, cutlery, 
&c. The value of the factory products increased from $8,886,676 
in 1900 to $11,009,573 in 1905, or 23-9%. The prominence of 
the rubber industry here is due to Charles Goodyear (q.v.) t who 
in 1821 entered into partnership with his father Amasa Goodyear 
for the manufacture of hardware. Vulcanized rubber overshoes 
were first made in Naugatuck, and in 1843 the Goodyear's 
Metallic Rubber Shoe Company was established here. The 
township was formed from parts of Waterbury, Bethany and 
Oxford, and was incorporated in 1 844 ; the borough was 
chartered in 1893; and the two were combined in 1895. 


NAUHEIM, or Bad-Nauheim, a watering-place of Germany, 
in the grand-duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt, situated on the north- 
east slope of the Taunus Mountains, 24 m. by rail N. of Frankfort- 
on-Main on the main line of railway to Cassel. Pop. (1905) 
5054. It has three Evangelical, a Roman Catholic and an 
English church. Its thermal waters (84 to 95 F.), although 
known for centuries, were, prior to 1835, only employed for the 
extraction of salt. They now yield about 2000 tons annually. 
The town has several parks, the largest being the Kurpark, 
125 acres in extent, in which are the Kurhaus and the two chief 
springs. The waters, which are saline, strongly impregnated 
with carbonic acid, and to a less extent with iron, are principally 
used for bathing, and are specific in cases of gout and rheumatism, 
but especially for heart affections. Three smaller springs, 
situated outside the Kurpark, supply water for drinking. In 
1890-1900 a new spring (saline) was tapped at a depth of 682 ft. 
Another attraction of the place is the Johannisberg, a hill 
773 ft. high, immediately overlooking the town. 

Nauheim, which was bestowed by Napoleon upon Marshal 
Davout, became a town in 1854. From 1815 to 1866 it. belonged 
to the electorate of Hesse-Cassel, but in 1866 it was ceded to 
the grand-duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt. It was the scene of 
fighting between the French and the Germans in 1762 and again 
in 1792. 

See Grodel, Bad Nauheim, seine Kurmittel (9th ed., Friedberg, 
1903); Credner, Die Kurmittel in Bad Nauheim (Leipzig, 1894); 
Bode, Bad Nauheim, seine Kurmittel und Erjolge (Wiesbaden, 1889); 
and Weber, Die Park- und Waldanlagen vom Bad Nauheim (Nauheim, 
1906). 


NAULETTE, a large cavern on the left bank of the Lesse, 
which joins the Meuse above Dinant, Belgium. Here in 1866 
Edouard Dupont discovered an imperfect human lower jaw, 
now in the Brussels Natural History Museum. It is of a very 
ape-like type in its extreme projection and that of the teeth 
sockets (teeth themselves lost), with canines very strong and 
large molars increasing in size backward. It was found associated 
with the remains of mammoth, rhinoceros and reindeer. The 
Naulette man is now assigned to the Mousterian Epoch. 

See G. de Mortillet, Le Prehistorique (1900); E. Dupont, Etude 
sur les fouilles scientifiques executees pendant Vhiver (1865-1866), p. 21. 


NAUMACHIA, the Greek word denoting a naval battle (vavs, 
ship, and judx*?, battle), used by the Romans as a term for a mimic 
sea-fight. These entertainments took place in the amphitheatre, 
which was flooded with water, or in specially constructed 
basins (also called naumachiae). The first on record, representing 
an engagement between a Tyrian and an Egyptian fleet, was given 
by Julius Caesar (46 B.C.) on a lake which he constructed in the 
Campus Martius. In 2 B.C. Augustus, at the dedication of the 
temple of Mars Ultor, exhibited a naumachia between Athenians 
and Persians, in a basin probably in the horti Caesaris, where 
subsequently Titus gave a representation of a sea-fight between 
Corinth and Corcyra. In that given by Claudius (a.d. 52) on 
the lacus Fucinus, 19,000 men dressed as Rhodians and Sicilians 
manoeuvred and fought. The crews consisted of gladiators and 
condemned criminals; in later times, even of volunteers. 

See L. Friedlander in J. Marquardt, Romische Staatsverwaltung, iii. 
(1885) P- 558. 


NAUMACHIUS, a Greek gnomic poet. Of his poems 73 
hexameters (in three fragments) are preserved by Stobaeus in his 
Florilegium; they deal mainly with the duty of a good wife. 
From the remarks on celibacy and the allusion to a mystic 
marriage it has been conjectured that the author was a Christian. 

The fragments, translated anonymously into English under the 
title of Advice loathe Fair Sex (1736), are in Gaisford's Poetae tninores 
Graeci y iii. (1823). 


NAUMANN, GEORG AMADEUS CARL FRIEDRICH (1797- 
1873), German mineralogist and geologist, was born at Dresden 
on the 30th of May 1797, the son of a distinguished musician 
and composer. He received his early education at Pforta, studied 
at Freiberg under Werner, and afterwards at Leipzig and Jena. 
He graduated at Jena, and was occupied in 1823 in teaching in 
that town and in 1824 at Leipzig. In 1826 he succeeded Mohs 
as professor of crystallography, in 1835 he became professor 
also of geognosy at Freiberg; and in 1842 he was appointed 
professor of mineralogy and geognosy in the university of Leipzig. 
At Freiberg he was charged with the preparation of a geological 
map of Saxony, which he carried out with the aid of Bernhard 
von Cotta in 1846. He was a man of encyclopaedic knowledge, 
lucid and fluent as a teacher. Early in life (1821-1822) he 
travelled in Norway, and his observations on that country, and 
his subsequent publications on crystallography, mineralogy and 
geology established his reputation. He was awarded the 
Wollaston Medal by the Geological Society of London in 1868. 
He died at Leipzig on the 26th of November 1873. 

He published Beitrage zur Kenntniss Norwegens (2 vols., 1824); 
Lehrbuch der Mineralogie (1*828); Lekrbuck der reinen und ange- 
wandten Krystallograpkie (2 vols, and atlas, 1830); Elemente der 
Mineralogie (1846; ed. 9, 1874; the 10th ed. [by F. Zirkel, 1877); 
Lehrbuch der Geognosie (2 vols, and atlas, 1 849-1 854, ed. 2, 1858- 
1872). 


NAUMBURG, a town of Germany, in the province of Prussian 
Saxony, the seat of the provincial law courts and court of appeal 
for the province and the neighbouring districts. It is situated 
on the Saale, near its junction with the Unstrut, in the centre 
of an amphitheatre of vine-clad hills, 29 m. S.W. from Halle, 
on the railway to Weimar and Erfurt. Pop. (1905) 25,137. 

The cathedral, an imposing building in the Romanesque Transi- 
tion style (1 207-1 242), has a Gothic choir at each end, and 
contains some interesting medieval sculptures. It is remarkable 
for its large crypt and its towers, a fourth having been added 
in 1894, the gift of the emperor William II. There are also 
four other Protestant churches (of which the town church, 
dedicated to St Wenceslaus and restored in 1 892-1 894, possesses 
two pictures by Lucas Cranach the elder), a Roman Catholic 
church, a gymnasium, a modern school, an orphanage and three 
hospitals. A curious feature of the town is the custom, which has 
not yet died out, of labelling the houses with signs, such as the 
" swan," the " leopard " and the " lion." The industries of the 
place mainly consist in the manufacture of cotton and woollen 
fabrics, chemicals, combs, beer, vinegar and leather. On the 
hills to the north of the town, across the Unstrut, lies Schenkel- 
burg, once the residence of the poet Gellert, and noticeable 
for the grotesque carvings in the sandstone rocks. 

In the 10th century Naumburg was a stronghold of the mar- 
graves of Meissen, who in 1029 transferred to it the bishopric of 
Zeitz. In the history of Saxony it is memorable as the scene of 
various treaties; and in 1561 an assembly of Protestant princes 
was held there, which made a futile attempt to cement the 
doctrinal dissensions of the Protestants. ~~ In 1564 the last bishop 
died, and the bishopric fell to the elector of Saxony. In 1631 
the town was taken by Tilly, and in 1632 by Gustavus Adolphus. 
It became Prussian in 1814. An annual festival, with a pro- 
cession of children, which is still held, is referred to an apocryphal 
siege of the town by the Hussites in 1432, but is probably con- 
nected with an incident in the brothers' war (1447-51), between 
the elector Frederick II. of Saxony and his brother Duke William. 
Karl Peter Lepsius (1775-1853), the antiquary and his more 
distinguished son Richard the Egyptologist, were born at 
Naumburg. 

See E. Borkowsky, Die Geschichte der Stadt Naumburg an der Saale 
(Stuttgart, 1897); E. Hoffmann, Naumburg an der Saale im Zeitalter 
der Reformation (Leipzig, 1900); S. Braun, Naumburger Annalen 
vom Jahre 799 bis 1613 (Naumburg, 1892); Puttrieh, Naumburg an 
der Saale, sein Dom und andre altertumliche Bauwerke (Leipzig, 1841- 
1843); and Wispel, Entwickelungsgeschickte der Stadt Naumburg an 
der Saale (Naumburg, 1903). 


NAUNTON, SIR ROBERT (1 563-1635), English politician, the 
son of Henry Naunton of Alderton, Suffolk, was educated at 
Trinity College, Cambridge, becoming a fellow of his college in 
1585 and public orator of the university in 1594. Walter 
Devereux, earl of Essex, enabled him to spend some time abroad, 
sending information about European affairs. Having returned 
to England, he entered parliament in 1606 as member for 
Helston, and he sat in the five succeeding parliaments; in 161 4 
he was knighted, in 1616 he became master of requests and later 
surveyor of the court of wards. In 161 8 his friend Buckingham 
procured for him the position of secretary of state. Naunton's 
strong Protestant opinions led him to favour more active inter- 
vention by England in the interests of Frederick V., and more 
vigorous application of the laws against Roman Catholics. 
Gondomar, the Spanish ambassador, complained to James, who 
censured his secretary. Consequently in 1623 Naunton resigned 
and was made master of the court of wards. He died at Lether- 
ingham, Suffolk, on the 27th of March 1635. Naunton's valuable 
account of Queen Elizabeth's reign was still in manuscript when 
he died. As Fragmenla regalia, wrillen by Sir Robert Naunton, 
it was printed in 1641 and again in 1642, a revised edition, 
Fragmenta Regalia, or Observations on Die late Queen Elizabeth, 
her Times and Favourites, being issued in 1653. It was again 
published in 1824, and an edition edited by A. Arber was brought 
out in 187c. It has also been printed in several collections and has 
been translated into French and Italian. There are several 
manuscript copies extant, and some of Naunton's letters are in 
the British Museum and in other collections. 

See Memoirs of Sir Robert Naunton (1814). 


NAUPACTUS (Ital. Lepanlo, mod. Gr. Epakto), a town in 
the nomarchy of Acarnania and Aetolia, Greece, situated on a 
bay on the north side of the straits of Lepanto. The harbour, 
once the best on the northern coast of the Corinthian Gulf, is now 
almost entirely choked up, and is accessible only to the smallest 
craft. Naupactus is an episcopal see; pop. about 2500. In 
Greek legend it appears as the place where the Heraclidae built 
a fleet to invade Peloponnesus. In historical times it belonged 
to the Ozolian Locrians; but about 455 B.C., in spite of a partial 
resettlement with Locrians of Opus, it fell to the Athenians, 
who peopled it with Messenian refugees and made it their chief 
naval station in western Greece during the Peloponnesian war. 
In 404 it was restored to the Locrians, who subsequently lost 
it to the Achaeans, but recovered it through Epaminondas. 
Philip II. of Macedon gave Naupactus to the Aetolians, who held 
it till 191, when after an obstinate siege it was surrendered to the 
Romans. It was still flourishing about a.d. i 70, but in Justinian's 
reign was destroyed by an earthquake. In the middle ages it fell 
into the hands of the Venetians, who fortified it so strongly that 
in 1477 it successfully resisted a four months' siege by a Turkish 
army thirty thousand strong; in 1499, however, it was taken 
by Bayezid II. The mouth of the Gulf of Lepanto was the scene 
of the great sea fight in which the naval power of Turkey was 
for the time being destroyed by the united papal, Spanish and 
Venetian forces (October 7, 157O. See Lepanto, Battle or*. In 
1678 it was recaptured by the Venetians, but was again restored 
in 1699, by the treaty of Karlowitz to the Turks; in the war of 
independence it finally became Greek once more (March 1829). 

See Strabo ix. pp. 426-427; Pausanias x. 38. 10-13; Thucydides 
i.-iii. passim; Livy. bk. xxxvi. passim; E. L. Hicks and G. F. Hill, 
Greek Historical Inscriptions (Oxford, 1901), No. 25. 


NAUPLIA, a town in the Peloponnesus, at the head of the 
Argolic Gulf. In the classical period it was a place of no import- 
ance, and when Pausanias lived, about a.d. 150, it was deserted. 
At a very early time, however, it seems to have been of greater 
note, being the seaport of the plain in which Argos and Mycenae 
are situated, and several tombs of the Mycenaean age have been 
found. A hero Nauplius took part in the Argonautic expedition; 
another was king of Euboea. The mythic importance of the town 
revived in the middle ages, when it became one of the chief cities 
of the Morea. It was captured in 1 2 1 1 by Godfrey Villehardouin 
with the help of Venetian ships; a French dynasty ruled in it for 
some time, and established the feudal system in the country. In 
1388 the Venetians bought Argos and Nauplia. In the wars 
between Venice and the Turks it often changed masters. It 
was given to the Turks at the peace concluded in 1540; 
it was recaptured by Venice in 1686, and Palamidhi on the hill 
overhanging the town was made a great fortress. In 1715 it was 
taken by the Turks; in 1770 the Russians occupied it for a short 
time. The Greeks captured it during the War of Independence 
on the 12th of December r822, and it was the seat of the Greek 
administration till 1833, when Athens became the capital of 
the country. It is the chief town of the department of Argolis 
(pop. in 1907, 81,943). Pop. a*bout 6000. 


NAUSEA (from Gr." paOs, a ship), sea-sickness, or generally 
any disposition to vomit; also used figuratively to denote 
feelings of strong aversion or dislike. 


NAUSICAA, in Greek legend, daughter of Alcinous, king of 
the Phaeacians in* the island of Scheria (Odyssey, vi. 15-315, 
viii. 457.) When Odysseus (Ulysses) was swept into the sea from 
the raft on which he had left the home of Calypso, he swam 
ashore to Scheria, where he fell asleep on the bank of a river. 
Here he was found by Nausicaa, who supplied him with clothes 
and took him to her father's palace, where he was hospitably 
entertained. She is said to have become the wife of Telemachus. 
The incident of Odysseus and Nausicaa formed the subject of a 
lost play by Sophocles and was frequently represented in ancient 
art. 


NAUTCH (Hindostani nach), an Indian ballet-dance. The 
nautch is performed by nautch-girls, who move their feet but 
little, and the dance consists of swaying the body and posturing 
with the arms. 


NAUTILUS. The term nautilus, meaning simply " the sailor," 
was applied by the ancient Greeks to the genus of eight-armed 
cuttlefishes or octopods which is now known as the paper nautilus, 
ancf whose scientific name is Argonauta (see Cephalopoda). 

This animal is not uncommon in the Mediterranean, and from 
its habit of floating at the surface attracted the attention of the 
fishermen and sailors of the Aegean Sea from the earliest times. 
The popular belief that the expanded arms are raised above the 
water to act as sails and that the other arms are used as oars 
was not based on any actual observation of the living animal, and 
it is now known that although the animal floats at the surface 
it does not sail, the expanded arms being applied to the exterior 
surface of the shell, which is secreted by them. The eggs are 
carried in the shell, and as this structure is entirely absent in the 
males, there is good reason to conclude that the habit of carrying 
the eggs and using one pair of arms for that purpose gave rise 
to the modification of those arms and the secretion of the shell 
by them. Huxley once expressed the truth of the matter with 
characteristic felicity in the remark that if the shell of the 
Argonaut is to be compared to anything of human invention or 
construction at all, it should be compared, not to a ship or boat, 
but to a perambulator. 

The shell of Argonauta (see fig. 1) is spirally coiled and sym- 
metrical, and thus bears a remarkable resemblance to the shell 
of the pearly nautilus and the extinct ammonites, especially 

	Fig. 1. — The Argonaut in life. (After Lacaze-Duthiers.) 
	Tr, Float; Br.a, ventral or posterior arms; Br.p, dorsal or 
	anterior arms; K, the expanded portion of them, once called the 
	sails; B % the beak; C, the shell; En, the funnel. 

as it is like that of the pearly nautilus coiled towards the dorsal 
or anterior surface of the animal. It is ornamented by ridges 
and furrows which pass in transverse curves from the inner to 
the outer margin of the coils. The outer margin or keel is some- 
what flattened and the whole shell is compressed from side to side. 
It differs entirely from the shell of the pearly nautilus in the 
absence of internal septa and siphuncle and in the absence of 
any attachment between it and the body. It is in fact entirely 
different in origin and relations to the body from the typical 
molluscan shell secreted by the mantle in other Cephalopods and 
other types of Mollusca. It is a structure sui generis, unique 
in the whole phylum of Mollusca. 

The only description of the living animal by a competent 
observer which we have is that of Lacaze Duthiers, made on a 
single specimen on the Mediterranean coast of France, and pub- 
lished in 1892, and even this is in some respects incomplete. 
The specimen after capture was carried in a bucket, and became 
separated from its shell. When placed with the shell in a large 
aquarium tank the animal resumed possession of the shell and 
assumed the attitude shown in fig. 1. The shell floated at 
the surface, doubtless in consequence of « the inclusion of some 
air in the cavity of the shell. It is not known with certainty 
that the animal is able in its natural state to descend below the 
surface; the specimen here considered never did so of its own 
accord, and when pushed down always rose again. 

The siphon or funnel is unusually large and prominent, and is the 
chief or only organ of locomotion, the water which is expelled from 
it driving the animal backwards. The arms are usually turned 
backwards and carried inside the shell, to the inner surface of which 
the suckers adhere, but one or two arms are from time to time 
extended in front. This does not apply to the dorsal arms which are 
applied to the outside of the shell, and the expanded membrane 
of these arms covers the greater part of its surface. The dorsal arms 
are turned backwards, and each is twisted so that the oral surfaces 
face each other and the suckers are in contact with the shell. The 
membrane or velum is thin, and is really a great expansion of a dorsal 
membrane similar to that which is found along the median dorsal 
line of the two posterior arms. The suckers of the originally posterior 
series of each dorsal arm lie alone the external border of the shell, 
and tha arm with its two rows of suckers extends round the whole 
border of the membrane, the arm being curved into a complete loop, 
so that its extremity reaches almost to the origin of the membrane 
near the base of the arm, the extremity being continued on to the 
internal surface of the membrane. The external row of suckers, 
originally the posterior row, are united by membrane which is con- 
tinuous with the velum. The smaller suckers on the more distal 
part of the arm, which extends along the edge of the shell-aperture, 
are quite sessile. In the figure of Lacaze-Duthiers (fig. i) the suckers 
appear to be turned away from the shell, but this is erroneous. 
A figure showing the natural position is given in the Monograph of 
the Cephalopoda in the series of Monographs issued by the Zoological 
Station of Naples. 

The animal described by Lacaze-Duthiers lived a fortnight in 
captivity, during which time it devoured with avidity small fishes 
which were presented to it, seizing them, not by throwing out all 
the ventral arms, but by means of the suckers near the mouth. 

Judging from these observations, Argonauta is a pelagic animal 
which lives and feeds near the surface of the ocean. Several 
species of Argonauta are known, distributed in the tropical parts 
of all the great oceans. The male is much smaller than the 
female, not exceeding an inch or ,so in length. It secretes no 
shell and its dorsal arms are not modified. The third arm on 
the left side, however, is modified in another way in connexion 
with reproduction. 

Argonauta is one of the Cephalopods in which the process known 
as hectocotylization of one arm is developed to its extreme degree, 
the arm affected becoming ultimately detached and left by the male 
in the mantle cavity of the female where it retains for some time its 
life and power of movement. The hectocotylus or copulatory arm in 
the Argonaut is developed at first in a closed cyst (fig. 2), which 

	Fig. 2.—a, Male of Argonauta argo, with the hectocotylized arm 
	still contained in its enveloping cyst, four times enlarged (after H. 
	Muller). 6, Hectocotylus of Tremoctopus violaceus (after Kolliker). 

afterwards bursts, allowing the arm to uncoil; the remains of the 
cyst form a sac on the back of the arm which serves to contain the 
spermatophores. 

The animal known as the Pearly Nautilus was unknown to the 
ancient Greeks, since its habitat is the seas of the far East, 
but in the middle ages, when its shell became known in Europe, 
it was called, from its superficial similarity to that of the original 
nautilus, by the same name. It was Linnaeus who, in order to 
distinguish the two animals, took the name " nautilus " from 
the animal to which it originally belonged and bestowed it upon 
the very different East Indian Mollusc, giving to the original 
nautilus the new name Argonauta. Zoological nomenclature 
dates from Linnaeus, and thus the nautilus is now the name of the 



only living genus of Tetrabranchiate Cephalopods. A detailed 
description of this animal is given in the article Cephalopoda 
(q.v.); it is only necessary to add here a brief account of its mode 
of life and habits. 

Four species are known from the Indian and Pacific oceans; they 
are gregarious and nocturnal animals living at some depth and 
apparently always on the bottom. The natural attitude of the 
animal as represented by Dr Willey is with the oral surface down- 
wards, the tentacles spread out, and the shell vertical. The chambers 
of the shell have no communication with one another nor with the 
siphuncle ; they are air-tight cavities and filled, not with water, but 
with a nitrogenous gas. ^ This necessarily very much reduces the 
specific gravity of the animal, but it is still heavier than the water 
and does not seem capable of rising to the surface any more than an 
octopus. Nautilus is rather abundant at some localities in the East 
Indian Archipelago, for example at Amboyna in the Moluccas. In 
190 1-1902 Dr Arthur Willey of Cambridge University spent some 
time in that region for the purpose of investigating the reproduction 
and development of the animal. He stationed himself at New 
Britain, known to the Germans as Neu Pommern, an island of the 
Bismarck Archipelago off the coast of Papua. The natives of this 
island use the nautilus for food, capturing them by means of a large 
fish-trap similar in construction to the cylindrical lobster-traps used 
by British fishermen. Fish is used for bait. Dr Willey found the 
males much more numerous than the females; of fifteen specimens 
captured on one occasion only two were females. He kept specimens 
alive both in vessels on shore and in large baskets moored at the 
bottom of the sea. He found that when they were placed in a vessel 
of sea water numbers of a small parasitic Crustacea issued from the 
mantle cavity. Some of the females laid eggs in captivity, but 
these were found not to be fertilized; they were about 3-5 centi- 
metres long and attached singly by a broad base to the sides of the 
cage in which the animals were confined. 

Literature.— Lacaze-Duthiers,"Observationd'unargonautede la 
M6diterran6e," Arch. zooL expir. x. (1902), p. 1892. Cephalopoda, by 
Jalta ; Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, monographs issued by 
the Zoological Station of Naples. Bashford Dean, " Notes on Living 
Nautilus, Amer. Natur. xxxv. (1901). A. Willey, Contribution to 
the Natural History of the Pearly Nautilus ; A. Willey T s Zoological 
Results, pt. vi. (1902). (J. T. C.) 


NAUVOO, a city of Hancock county, Illinois, U.S.A., on the 
Mississippi river at the head of the lower rapids and about 50 m. 
aboveQuincy. Pop. (1900) 1321; (1910) 1020. On the opposite 
bank of the river is Montrose, Iowa (pop. in 1910, 708), served 
by the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy railway. Nauvoo is the 
seat of St Mary's Academy and Spalding Institute (1907), 
two institutions of the Benedictine Sisters. " Commerce City " 
was laid out here in 1834 by Connecticut speculators; but the 
first settlement of importance was made by the Mormons (q.v.) 
in 1 839- 1840; they named it Nauvoo, 1 in obedience to a 
" revelation " made to Joseph Smith, and secured a city charter 
in 1 840. Four years later its population was about 1 5,000, and 
a large Mormon temple had been built, but internal dissensions 
arose, "gentile" hostility was aroused, the charter of Nauvoo 
was revoked in 184s, two of the leaders, Joseph Smitb and his 
brother Hyrum, were killed at Carthage, the county-seat, by 
a mob, and in 1846 the sect was driven from the state. Traces of 
Mormonism, however, still remain in the ruins of the temple 
and the names of several of the streets. Three years after the 
expulsion of the Mormons Nauvoo was occupied by the remnant 
(some 250) of a colony of French communists, the Icarians, 
who had come out under the leadership of fitienne Cabet (q.v.). 
For a few years the colony prospered, and by 1855 its membership 
had doubled. It was governed under a constitution, drafted 
by Cabet, which vested the legislative authority in a general 
assembly composed of all the males twenty years of age or over 
and the administrative authority in a board of six directors, 
three of whom were elected every six months for a term of one 
year. Each family occupied its own home, but property was 
held in common, all ate at the common table, and the children 
were taught in the community school. In December 1855 
Cabet proposed a revision of the constitution to give him greater ■ 
authority. This resulted in rending the colony into two irrecon- 
cilable factions, and in October 1856 Cabet with the minority 
(172) withdrew to St Louis, Mo., where he died on the 8th of 
November. In May 1858 the surviving members of his faction 
together with a few fresh arrivals from France established a new 

	1 The Mormons said the name was of Hebrew origin and meant 
	" beautiful place "; Hebrew " naveh " means " pleasant.'* 

Icarian colony at Cheltenham near St Louis, but this survived 
only for a brief period. Nauvoo was never intended to be more 
than a temporary home for the Icarians. Soon after the schism 
of 1856 those who had rebelled against Cabet began to prepare 
a permanent home in Adams county, Iowa. There too in 1879 
the community split into two factions, the Young Party and the 
Old Party. Some time before this separation a few members 
of the colony removed to the vicinity of Cloverdale, Sonoma 
county, California, and here most of the members of the Young 
Party joined them early in 1884 in forming the Icaria-Speranza 
Community. This society tried a government quite different 
from that first adopted at Nauvoo, but it ceased to exist after 
about three years. The Old Party also adopted a new constitu- 
tion, but it too was dissolved in 1895. 

See Albert Shaw, Icaria: A Chapter in the History of Communism 
(New York, 1884); Jules Prudhommeaux, Icaria et son fondateur 
txienne Cabet (Paris, 1907); and H. Lux, £tienne Cabet und der 
Ikarische Kommunismtis (Stuttgart, 1894). 


NAVAHO, or Navajo, a tribe of North American Indians of 
Athabascan stock. They inhabit the northern part of Arizona 
and New Mexico. The majority live by breeding horses, sheep 
and goats. They are well known for their beautiful blanket 
weaving. (See Indians, North American.) 


NAVAN, a market town of county Meath, Ireland, situated at 
the confluence of the Blackwater with the Boyne. Pop. (1901) 
3839. It is a railway junction of some importance, where the 
Clonsilla and Kingscourt branch of the Midland Great Western 
railway crosses the Drogheda and Oldcastle branch of the Great 
Northern. By the former it is 30 m. N.W of Dublin. Navan 
is the principal town of county Meath (though Trim is the county 
town), and has considerable trade in corn and flour, some manu- 
facture of woollens and of agricultural implements, and a tannery. 
Navan was a barony of the palatinate of Meath, was walled and 
fortified, and was incorporated by charter of Edward IV. It 
suffered in the civil wars of 1641, and returned two members to 
the Irish parliament until the Union in 1800. It is governed by 
an urban district council, and is a favourite centre for rod-fishing 
for trout and salmon. 


NAVARINO, BATTLE OF, fought on the 20th of October 1827, 
the decisive event which established the independence of Greece. 
By the treaty signed in London on the 6th of July 1827 (see 
Greece, History) , England, France and Russia agreed to demand 
an armistice, as preliminary to a settlement. Sir Edward 
Codrington, then commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, 
received the treaty and his instructions on the night of the 
loth/nth of August at Smyrna, and proceeded at once to Nauplia 
to communicate them to the Greeks. His instructions were to 
demand an armistice, to intercept all supplies coming to the 
Turkish forces in the Morea from # Africa or Turkey in general, 
and to look for directions to Stratford Canning (Lord Stratford 
de Redcliffe), the British ambassador at Constantinople. The 
ambassador's instructions reached Codrington on the 7th of 
September. He was accompanied to Nauplia by his French 
colleague, Rear-Admiral de Rigny. The Greek government 
agreed to accept the armistice. Admiral de Rigny left for a 
cruise in the Levant, and Sir Edward Codrington, hearing that an 
Egyptian armament was on its way from Alexandria, and 
believing that it was bound for Hydra, steered for that island, 
which he reached on the 3rd of September, but on the 12th of 
September found the Egyptians at anchor with a Turkish squadron 
at Navarino. The Turkish government refused to accept the 
armistice. On the 19th of September, seeing a movement among 
the Egyptian and Turkish ships in the bay, Codrington informed 
the Ottoman admiral, Tahir Pasha, that he had orders to prevent 
hostile movements against the Greeks. Admiral de Rigny joined 
him immediately afterwards, and a joint note was sent by them 
on the 22nd of September to Ibrahim Pasha, who held the 
superior command for the sultan. On the 25th an interview 
took place, in which Ibrahim gave a verbal engagement not to act 
against the Greeks, pending orders from the sultan. The allies, 
who were in want of stores, now separated, Codrington going to 
Zante and de Rigny to Cervi, where his store ships were. Frigates 
were left to watch Navarino. The British admiral had barely 
anchored at Zante before he was informed that the sultan's 
forces were putting to sea. On the 29th of September a -Greek 
naval force, commanded by an English Philhellene, Captain 
Frank Abney Hastings, had destroyed some Turkish vessels in 
Salona Bay, on the north side of the Gulf of Corinth. From 
the 3rd to the 5th of October Codrington, who had with him 
only his flagship the " Asia " (84) and some smaller vessels, 
was engaged in turning back the Egyptian and Turkish vessels, 
a task in which he was aided by a violent gale. He resumed his 
watch off Navarino, and on the 13th was joined by de Rigny 
and the Russian rear-admiral Heiden with his squadron. 
By general agreement among the powers the command was 
entrusted to Codrington, and the allied force consisted of three 
British, four French and four Russian sail of the line, if the 
French admiral's flagship the " Sirene " (60), which was technic- 
ally " a double banked frigate," be included. There were four 
British, one French and four Russian frigates, and six British 
and French brigs and schooners. The Egyptians and Turks had 
only three line of battleships and fifteen large frigates, together 
with a swarm of small craft which raised their total number 
to eighty and upwards. Ibrahim Pasha, though unable to 
operate at sea, considered himself at liberty to carry on the war 
by land. His men were actively employed in burning the 
Greek villages, and reducing the inhabitants to slavery. The 
flames and smoke of the destroyed villages were clearly seen 
from the allied fleet. On the 17th of October, a joint letter of 
expostulation was sent in to Ibrahim Pasha, but was returned 
with the manifestly false answer that he had left Navarino, and 
that his officers did not know where he was. The admirals, 
therefore, decided to stand into the bay and anchor among the 
Egyptian and Turkish ships. A French officer in the Egyptian 
service, of the name of Letellier, had anchored the vessels of 
Ibrahim and the Turkish admiral in a horseshoe formation, of 
which the points touched the entrance to the bay, and there were 
forts on the lands at both sides of the entry. The allies entered in 
two lines — one formed of the French and British led by Codrington 
in the " Asia," the other of the Russians, — and began to anchor 
in the free water in the midst of Ibrahim's fleet. The officer 
commanding the British frigate " Dartmouth " (42), Captain 
Fellowes, seeing a Turkish fireship close to windward of him, 
sent a boat with a demand that she should be removed. The 
Turks fired, killing Lieutenant G. W. H. Fitzroy, who brought 
the message, and several of the boat's crew. The " Dartmouth " 
then opened " a defensive fire," and the action became general 
at once. The allies, who were all closely engaged, were anchored 
among their enemies, and the result was obtained by their heavier 
broadsides and their better gunnery. Three-fourths of the 
Turkish and Egyptian vessels were sunk by the assailants, or fired 
by their own crews. On the allied side the British squadron 
lost 75 killed and 197 wounded; the French 43 killed and 183 
wounded; the Russians 59 killed and 139 wounded. In the 
British squadron Captain Walter Bathurst of the " Genoa " (74) 
was slain. The loss of the Turks and Egyptians was never 
accurately reported, but it was certainly very great. 

In its effects on the international situation Navarino may be 
reckoned one of the decisive battles of the world. It not only 
made the efforts of the Turks to suppress the Greek revolt hope- 
less, but it made a breach difficult to heal in the traditional 
friendship between Great Britain and Turkey, which had its 
effect during the critical period of the struggle between Mehemet 
Ali and the Porte (1831-1841). It precipitated the Russo- 
Turkish war of 1 828-1 829, and, by annihilating the Ottoman 
navy, weakened the resisting power of Turkey to Russia and 
later to Mehemet Ali. 

See Memoir of Admiral Sir E. Codrington^ by his daughter Lady 
Bourchier (London, 1873); Naval History of Great Britain, by W. 
James and Captain Chamier, vol. vi. (London, 1837). (D. H.) 


NAVARRE (Span. Navarra), an inland province of northern 
Spain, and formerly a kingdom which included part of France. 
The province is bounded on the N. by France (Basses Pyrenees) 
and Guipuzcoa, E. by Huesca and Saragossa, S. by Saragossa 
and Logrono and W. by Alava. It is traversed from east to 
west by the Pyrenees and the Cantabrian Mountains, and almost 
the whole of the province is overrun by the ramifications of these 
ranges. From Navarre there are only three practicable roads for 
carriages into France — those by the Puerta de Vera, the Puerta dc 
Maya and Roncesvalles. The highest summit in the province 
is the Monte Adi (4931 ft.). The chief river flowing towards the 
Atlantic is the Bidasoa, which rises near the Puerta de Maya, 
and after flowing southwards through the valley of Baztan takes 
a north-easterly course, and for a short distance ahove its outfall 
at Fuenterrahia constitutes the frontier between France and 
Spain (Guipuzcoa); by far the larger portion of Navarre is 
drained to the Mediterranean through the Ebro, which flows 
along the western frontier and crosses the extreme south of the 
province. The hilly districts consist almost entirely of forest 
and pasture, the most common trees being the pine, beech, oak 
and chestnut. Much of the lower ground is well adapted for 
agriculture, and j yields grain in abundance; the principal 
fruit grown is the apple, from which cider is made in some 
districts; hemp, flax and oil are also produced, and mulherries 
are cultivated for silkworms. The wine trade is active, and the 
products of the vineyards are in great demand in south-west 
France and at Passages in Guipuzcoa for mixing with French 
wines. Navarre is one of the richest provinces of Spain in live 
stock. Game, both large and small, is plentiful in the mountains, 
and the streams abound with trout and other fish. Gypsum, 
limestone, freestone and marble are quarried; there are also 
mines of copper, lead, iron, zinc and rock salt. Mineral and 
thermal springs are numerous, but none is of more than local 
fame. The other industries include manufactures of arms, 
paper, chocolate, candles, alcohol, leather, coarse linens and 
cloth. The exports both by rail and by the passes in the 
Pyrenees consist of live stock, oil, wine, wool, leather and paper. 

The Ebro Valley railway, which traverses southern Navarre 
and skirts the western -frontier, sends out a branch line from 
Castejon to Pamplona and Alsasua junction, where it connects 
with the Northern railways from Madrid to France. Narrow- 
gauge railways convey timber and ore from the mountains to 
these main lines. Pamplona, the capital (pop., 1000, 28,886), 
and Tudela (9449) arc described in separate articles. The only 
other towns with more than 5000 inhabitants are Baztan (9234), 
Corella (6793), Estella (5736) and Tafalla (5494). 

History. — The kingdom of Navarre was formed out of a part 
of the territory occupied by the Vascones, i.e. the Basques and 
Gascons, who occupied the southern slope of the western Pyrenees 
and part of the shore of the Bay of Biscay. In the course of the 
6th century there was a considerable emigration of Basques to 
the north of the Pyrenees. The cause is supposed to have been 
the pressure put upon them by the attacks of the Visigoth kings 
in Spain. Yet the Basques maintained their independence. 
The name of Navarre is derived by etymologists from " nava " 
a flat valley surrounded by hills (a commonplace name in Spain; 
cf. Navas de Tolosa to the south of the Sierra Morena) and "crri " 
a region or country. It began to appear as the name of part of 
Vasconia towards the end of the Visigoth epoch in Spain in the 
7th century. Its early history is more than obscure. In recent 
times ingenious attempts have been made to trace the descent 
of the first historic king of Navarre from one Semen Lupus, duke 
of Aquitaine in the 6th century. The reader may consult La 
Vasconie by Jean de Jaurgain (Paris, 1898) for the latest example 
of this reconstruction of ancient history from fragmentary and 
duhious materials. Jaurgain has been subjected to very damag- 
ing criticism by L. Barrau-Dihigo (Revue Hispanique, t. vii. 
141). The first historic king of. Navarre was Sancho Garcia, 
who ruled at Pamplona in the early years of the 10th century. 
Under him and his immediate successors Navarre reached the 
height of its power and its extension* (see Spain: History j for 
the reign of Sancho cl Mayor, and the establishment of the 
Navarrese line as kings of Castile and Leon, and of Aragon). 
When the kingdom was at its height it included all the modern 
province of the name; the northern slope of the western Pyrenees 
called by the Spaniards the " Ultra-pucrtos " or country beyond 
the passes, and now known as French Navarre; the Basque 
provinces; the Bureba, the valley between the Basque Mountains 
and the Montes de Oca to the north of Burgos; the Rioja and 
Tarazona in the upper valley of the Ebro. In the 12th century 
the kings of Castile gradually annexed the Rioja and Alava. 
While Navarre was reunited to Aragon — 1076-1 134 — (see 
Spain: History) it was saved from aggression on the east, but 
did not recover the territory taken by Castile. About the year 
1200 Alfonso VIII. of Castile annexed the other two Basque 
provinces, B iscay ( Vizcaya) and G uipuzcoa . Tarazona re- 
mained in possession of Aragon. After 1234 Navarre, though the 
crown was claimed by the kings of Aragon, passed by marriage 
to a succession of French rulers. In 15 16 Spanish Navarre 
was finally annexed by Ferdinand the Catholic. French Navarre 
survived as an independent little kingdom till it was united to 
the crown of France by Henry IV. founder of the Bourbon 
dynasty. From 1510 until 1833, when it was fully incorporated 
with Spain, Navarre was a viceroyalty. 

As originally organized, Navarre was divided into Merindades, or 
districts, governed by a Merino (mayorino) as representative of the 
king. They were the Ultrapuertos (French Navarre), Pamplona, 
Estella, Judela, Sanguesa. In 1407 Olite was added. The Cortes of 
Navarre began with the king's council of churchmen and nobles. 
Butin the course of the 14th century the burgesses were added. 
Their presence was due to the fact that the king had need of their 
co-operation to raise money by grants and aids. When fully con- 
stituted, the Cortes consisted of the churchmen, the nobles and the 
representatives of twenty-seven " good towns " — that is to say, 
towns which had no feudal lord, and, therefore, held directly of the 
king. In the later stages of its history the Cortes of Navarre included 
the representatives of thirty-eight towns. The independence of the 
burgesses was better secured in Navarre than in other parliaments of 
Spain by the constitutional rule which required the consent of a 
majority of each order to every act of the Cortes. Thus the bui jesses 
could not be outvoted by the nobles and the Church. Even in the 
1 8th century the Navarrese successfully resisted the attempt of the 
kings of the^ Bourbon dynasty to establish custom houses on the 
French frontier. Yet they were loyal to their Spanish sovereigns, 
and no part of the country offered a more aetermined or more skilful 
resistance to Napoleon. Navarre was much under clerical influence. 
This, and the resentment felt at the loss of their autonomy when they 
were incorporated with the rest of Spain in 1833, account for the 
strong support given by many Navarrese to the Carlist cause. 

See Hisioria Compendiada de Navarra by Don J. M. Yanguas, 
(San Sebastian, 1832). 


NAVARRETE, JUAN FERNANDEZ (1526-1579), surnamed 
EI Mudo (The Mute), Spanish painter of the Madrid school, 
was born at Logrono in 1526. An illness in infancy deprived him 
of his hearing, but at a very early age he began to express his 
wants by sketching objects with a piece of charcoal. He received 
his first instructions in art from Fray Vicente dc Santo Domingo, 
a Hieronymite monk at Estella, and afterwards he visited Naples, 
Rome, Florence and Milan. According to the ordinary account 
he was for a considerable time the pupil of Titian at Venice. In 
1 568 Philip II. summoned him to Madrid with the title of king's 
painter and a salary, and employed him to execute pictures for 
the Escorial. The most celebrated of the works he there pro- 
duced are a "Nativity" (in which, as in the well-known work on 
the same subject by Correggio, the light emanates from the 
infant Saviour), a "Baptism of Christ" (now in the Madrid Picture 
Gallery), and " Abraham Receiving the Three Angels " (one of his 
last performances, dated 1576). He executed many other 
altarpieces, all characterized hy boldness and freedom in design, 
and by the rich warm colouring which has acquired for him the 
surname of " the Spanish Titian." He died at Toledo in February 
1579. 


NAVARRETE, MARTIN FERNANDEZ DE (1765-1844), 
Spanish historian, was born at Abalos on the 9th of November 
1765, and entered the navy in 1780. He was engaged in the 
unsuccessful operations against Gibraltar in 1782, and afterwards 
in the suppression of Algerine pirates. Ill-health compelled him 
for a time to withdraw from active service, but he devoted this 
forced leisure to historical research, and in 1789 he was appointed 
by the crown to examine the national archives relating to the 
maritime history of Spain. Rejoining the navy in 1793, he was 
present at the siege of Toulon, and afterwards received command 
of a frigate. From 1797 to 1808 he held in succession various 
important posts in the ministry of marine. In 1808 the French 
invasion led to his withdrawal to Andalusia, and the rest of his 
life was entirely devoted to literature. In 18 19 appeared, as an 
appendix to the Academy's edition of Don Quijote, his Vida de 
Cervantes, and in 1825 the first two volumes of the Coleccion de 
los Viajes y Deseubrimientos que hicieron por Mar los Espafwles 
desde fines del Siglo XV. (3rd vol., 1829; 4th vol., 1837). In 
1837 he was made a senator and director of the academy of 
history. At the time of his death, on the 8th of Octoher 1844, 
he was assisting in the preparation of the Coleccion de Docu- 
mentos Ineditos para la Historia de Espaha. His Disertacion 
sobre la Historia de la Nautica (1846) and Biblioteca Maritima 
Espaflola (1851). were published posthumously. 


NAVARRO, PEDRO (c. 1460-1528), Spanish military engineer 
and general, of obscure parentage, was born probably about 1460. 
He began life as a sailor; and was employed later as mozo de 
espuela, or running footman, by the Cardinal Juan de Aragon; 
on the death of his employer in 1485 he enlisted as a 
mercenary in a war between Florence and Genoa; and was sub- 
sequently engaged for some years in the warfare he t ween the 
Genoese corsairs and the Mahommedans of Northern Africa. 
Navarro was not more scrupulous than others, for in 1499 he was 
at Civitavecchia, recovering from a gunshot wound in the hip 
received in a piratical attack on a Portuguese trading ship. 
When Gonsalvo de C6rdoha was sent to Sicily, to take part with 
the French in the partition of Naples, Navarro enlisted under 
him; and in the expulsion of the Turkish garrison from Cepha- 
lonia in 1500 he helped by laying mines to hreach the walls, 
though not at first with much success. The Spanish commander 
gave him a captain's commission. During the campaigns of 
1502 and 1503 he came to the front among the Spanish officers 
by the defence of Canosa and of Taranto, by his activity in 
partisan warfare on the French lines of communication, and 
by the part he took in winning the battle of Cerinola. But his 
great reputation among the soldiers of the time was founded 
on the vigour and success of his mining operations against the 
castles of Naples, held by French garrisons, in 1503, and he was 
undoubtedly recognized as the first military engineer of his age. 
When the French were expelled from Naples he received from 
Gonsalvo a grant of land and the title of count of Olivette 
In 1506 he was in Spain, and for several years he was employed 
in wars on the north coast of Africa. In 1508 he took Velez de 
Gomera, largely by means of a species of floating battery which 
he invented. In 1509 he accompanied Ximenez in the conquest 
of Oran, and did excellent service. Till 1511 he continued in 
service in Africa, and took Bougie and Tripoli in 15 10. The 
disasters at Gerba and Kerkenna did not materially affect his 
reputation. There was some talk of appointing him to command 
the army of the league formed against the French in 1512; 
but his humble birth was thought to disqualify him. He was, 
however, sent as a subordinate general. At the battle of Ravenna 
he covered the orderly retreat of the Spanish foot, and was 
struck from his horse by a shot which failed to pierce his armour. 
Being taken prisoner by the French, he was sent to the Castle 
of Loches. Ferdinand, whom the soldiers called an Aragonese 
skinflint, would not pay his ransom, and after three years of 
imprisonment he entered the service of Francis I. in a pique. 
The rest of his life was spent as a French officer. He distin- 
guished himself in the passage of the Alps, at the battle of 
Marignano, by the taking of the citadel of Milan, and in the long 
siege of Brescia. He was at the battle of Pavia, and in 1522 
was taken prisoner at Genoa by his own countrymen. He was 
confined at Naples till the peace of 1 526, but beyond the confisca- 
tion of his estate at Olivetto no punishment was inflicted for his 
treason. His last service was in the disastrous expedition of 
Lautrec to Naples in 1527, which was ruined by the plague. He 
died near the end of 1528. 

A life of Navarro by Don Martin de los Heros, is published in the 
Documentos iniditos para la Historia de Espana, vol. xxv. (Madrid, 
1854). 


NAVE, ecclesiastically considered, that part of a church 
appropriated to the laity as distinguished from the chancel, 
the choir or the presbytery, reserved for the clergy. In a 14th- 
century letter (quoted in Gasquet's Parish Lije in Medieval 
England, 1906, p. 45) from a bishop of Coventry and Lichfield 
to one of his clergy, the reason for this appropriation is given. 
" Not only the decrees of the • holy fathers but the approved 
existing customs of the Church order that the place in which 
the clerks sing and serve God according to their offices be 
divided by screens from that in which the laity devoutly pray. 
In this way the nave of the church ... is alone to be open to 
lay people, in order that, in the time of divine service, clerics 
be not mixed up with lay people, and more especially with women, 
nor have communication with them, for in this way devotion 
may be easily diminished." The word " nave " has been 
generally derived from Lat. navis, ship. Du Cange (Glossarium, 
s.v. " Navis ") quotes from the Chronicon Moriniacense, of the 
1 2th century, as to the popular origin of the name, Exterius 
etiam tabernaculum, quod ecclesiae navis a poptilo vocatur .... 
Salmasius in his commentary on Solinus (1629) finds the origin 
in the resemblance of the vaulted roof to the keel of a ship, and 
refers to Sallust (Jugurtha, 18. 8) where is noticed a similar 
.resemhlance in the huts (mapalia) of the Numidians. The use 
of the word navis may, however, be due to the early adoption 
of the " ship " as a symbol of the church (see Skeat's note on 
Piers Plowman, xl. 32). The Greek vaos, Attic ve&s (vaieiv, 
to dwell), the inner shrine of a Greek temple, the cella, has also 
been suggested as the real origin of the word. This derivative 
must presume a latinized corruption into navis, for the early 
application of the word for ship to this part of a church building 
is undoubted. 1 

Architecturally considered the nave is the central and principal 
part of a church, extending from the main front to the transepts, 
or to the choir or chancel in the absence of transepts. When 
the nave is flanked by aisles, light is admitted to the church 
through clerestory windows, some of the most ancient examples 
being the basilica at Bethlehem and the church of St Elias, 
at Thessalonica, both of the 5th century; numerous churches 
in Rome; and in the 6th century the two great hasilicas at 
Ravenna; in all these cases the sills of the clerestory windows 
were raised sufficiently to allow of a sloping roof over the side 
aisles. When, however, a gallery was carried above the side 
aisles, another division was required, which is known as the 
triforium, and this subdivision was retained in the nave even 
when it formed a passage, only in the thickness of the wall. 
In Late Gothic work in England, the triforium was suppressed 
altogether to give more space for the clerestory windows, and 
roofs of low pitch were provided over the side aisles. 

The longest nave in England is that of St Albans (300 it.), in 
which there are thirteen nave arches or bays on each side; in 
Winchester (264 ft.) there are twelve bays; in Norwich (250ft.) 
fourteen; Peterborough (226 ft.) eleven; and Ely (203 ft.) twelve 
bays. Most of these dimensions are in excess of those of the French 
cathedrals; Bourges is 300 ft. long, but as there are no transepts 
this dimension includes nave and choir. Cluny was 230 ft. with 
eleven bays; Reims is 235 ft. with ten bays; Paris 170 ft. with ten 
bays; Amiens 160 with ten bays; and St Ouen, Rouen, 200 ft. with 
ten bays. In Germany the nave of Cologne cathedral is only 190 ft., 
including the two bays between the towers. The cathedral at 
Seville in Spain is 200 ft. long, with only five bays. In Italy the 
cathedral at Milan is 270 ft. long with nine bays; at Florence, 250 it. 
long with only four bays; and St Peter's in Rome 300 ft. long with 
four bays. On the other hand, the vaults in the nave of the con- 
tinental cathedrals are far higher than those in England, that of 
Westminster Abbey being only 103 ft. high, whilst the choir of 
Beauvais is 150 ft. The result is that the^ naves of the English 
cathedrals not only are longer in actual dimensions, but appear 
much longer in consequence of their inferior height. 

1 Vessels resembling boats or shins are familiar in medieval art 
and later. Thus " Incense-boats " (navettes) somewhat of this shape 
are found in 12th-century sculptures. By the 16th century they 
approximated still more closely to a model of a ship. A large vessel, 
also in the shape of a boat or ship, and known as a nef, was used at 
the table of princes and great personages to contain the knives, 
spoons, &c. Some very elaborate examples of these survive, such as 
the 15th-century nef of St Ursula in the treasure of the cathedral at 
Reims, and that of Charles V. of France in the Musee Cluny. A 
16th-century nef, adapted for use as a cup, is in the Franks Collection 
at the British Museum. (See Drinking Vessels.) 


NAVEL ( O. Eng. nafela, a word common to Teutonic languages; 
cf. Ger. Nabel y Swed. nafvel; the Sanskrit is ndbhlla; the 
English root is also seen in " nave," the hub of a wheel), in 
anatomy, the umbilicus (Gr. 6fx<j>ahbs), the depression in the 
abdomen which indicates the point through which the embryo 
mammal obtained nourishment from its mother (see Anatomy: 
section Superficial and Artistic). 


NAVIGATION (from Lat. navis, ship, and agere, to move), the 
science or art of conducting a ship across the seas. The term 
is also popularly used by analogy of boats on rivers, &c, and of 
flying-machines or similar methods of locomotion. Navigation, 
as an art applied properly to ships, is technically used in the 
restricted sense dealt with below, and has therefore to be 
distinguished from " seamanship " (q.v.) y or the general 
methods of rigging a ship (see Rigging), or the management 
of sails, rudder, &c. 

History. 

The early history of the rise and progress of the art of naviga- 
tion is very obscure, and it is more easy to trace the gradual 
advance of geographical knowledge by its means than the 
growth of the practical methods by which this advance was 
attained. Among Western nations before the introduction of 
the mariner's compass the only practical means of navigating 
ships was to keep in sight of land, or occasionally, for short 
distances, to direct the ship's course by referring it to the sun 
or stars; this very rough mode of procedure failed in cloudy 
weather, and even in short voyages in the Mediterranean in 
such circumstances the navigator generally became hopelessly 
bewildered as to his position. 

Over the China Sea and Indian Ocean the steadiness in direc- 
tion of the monsoons was very soon observed, and by running 
directly before the wind vessels in those localities were able to 
traverse long distances out of sight of land in opposite directions 
at different seasons of the year, aided in some cases by a rough 
compass (q.v.). But it is surprising when we read of the progress 
made among the ancients in fixing positions on shore by practical 
astronomy that so many years should have passed without its 
application to solving exactly the same problems at sea, but 
this is probably to be explained by the difficulty of devising 
instruments for use on the unsteady platform of a ship, coupled 
with the lack of scientific education among those who would 
have to use them. 

The association of commercial activity and nautical progress 
shown by the Portuguese in the early part of the 15th century 
marked an epoch of distinct progress in the methods of practical 
navigation, and initiated that steady improvement which in 
the 20th century has raised the art of navigation almost to the 
position of an exact science. Up to the time of the Portuguese 
exploring expeditions, sent out by Prince Henry, generally 
known as the " Navigator," which led to the discovery of the 
Azores in 1419, the rediscovery of the Cape Verde Islands in 
1447 and of Sierra Leone in 1460, navigation had been conducted 
in the most rude, uncertain and dangerous manner it is possible 
to conceive. Many years had passed without the least improve- 
ment being introduced, except the application of the magnetic 
needle about the beginning of the 14th century (see Compass 
and Magnetism). Prince Henry did all in his power to bring 
together and systematize the knowledge then obtainable upon 
nautical affairs, and also established an observatory at Sagres 
(near Cape St Vincent) in order tc obtain more accurate tables 
of the declination of the sun. John II., who ascended the throne 
of Portugal in 1481, followed up the good work. He employed 
Roderick and Joseph, his physicians, with Martin de Bohemia, 
from Fayal, to act as a committee on navigation. They calcu- 
lated tables of the sun's declination, and improved the astrolabe, 
recommending it as more convenient than the cross-staff. The 
Ordenanzas of the Spanish council of the Indies record the course 
of instruction prescribed at this time for pilots; it included the 
De Sphaera Mundi of Sacrobosco, the spherical triangles of 
Regiomontanus, the Almagest of Ptolemy, the use of the astrolabe 
and its mechanism, the adjustments of instruments, cartography 
and the methods of observing the movements of heavenly bodies. 

The then backward state of navigation is best understood from a 
sketch of the few rude appliances which the mariner had, and even 
these were only intended for the purpose of ascertaining the latitude. 
The mystery of finding the longitude proved unfathomable for many 
years after the time of the Armada, and the very inaccurate know- 
ledge existing of the positions of the heavenly bodies themselves fully 
justified the quaintly expressed advice given in a nautical work of 
repute at the time, where the writer observes, " Now there be some 
that are very inquisitive to have a way to get the longitude, but that 
is too tedious for seamen, since it requireth the deep knowledge of 
astronomy, wherefore I would not have any man think that the 
longitude is to be found at sea by any instrument; so let no seamen 
trouble themselves with any such rule, but (according to their 
accustomed manner) let them keep a perfect account and reckoning 
of the way of their ship." Such record of the " way of the ship 
appears to have been then and for many years later recorded in 
chalk on a wooden board (log board), which folded like a book, and 
from which each day a position for the ship was deduced, or from 
which the more careful made abstracts into what was termed the 
14 journal." 

A comoass, a cross-staff^ or astrolabe, a. fairly good table of the 
sun's declination, a correction for the altitude of the pole star, and 
occasionally a very incorrect chart formed all the appliances of a 
navigator in the time of Columbus. For a knowledge of the speed of 
the ship one of the earliest methods of actual measurement in use 
was by what was known as the " Dutchman's log," which consisted 
in throwing into the water, from the bows of the ship, something 
which would float, and noting the interval between its apparently 
drifting past two observers standing on the deck at a known distance 
apart. No other method is mentioned until 1577, when a line was 
attached to a small log of wood, which was thrown overboard, and 
the length measured which was carried over in a certain interval of 
time; this interval of time was, we read, generally obtained by the 
repetition of certain sentences, which were repeated twice if the ship 
were only moving slowly. It is unfortunate that the words of this 
ancient shibboleth are unknown. This is mentioned by Purchas as 
being in occasional use in 1607, but the more usual method (as we 
incidentally see in the voyages of Columbus) was to estimate or guess 
the rate of progress. It was customary by one or other of these 
methods to determine the speed of a ship every two hours, " royal " 
ships and those with very careful captains doing so every hour. 
When a vessel hadbeen on various courses during the two hours, a 
record of the duration on each was usually kept by the helmsman on 
a traverse board, which consisted of a board having 32 radial lines 
drawn on it representing the points of the compass, with holes at 
various distances from the centre, into which pegs were inserted, the 
mean or average course being that entered^ on the log board. 

Some idea of the speed of ordinary ships in those days may be 
gathered from an observation in 1551 of a "certain shipp which, 
without ever striking sail, arrived at Naples from Drepana, in Sicily, 
in 37 hours" (a distance of 200 m.); the writer accounting for 
" such swift motion, which to the common sort of man scemeth 
incredible," by the fact of the occurrence of " violent floods and 
outrageous winds." In 1578 we find in Bourne's Inventions and 
Devices a description of a proposed patent log for recording a vessel's 
speed, the idea (as far as we can gather from its vague description) 
being to register the revolutions of a wheel enclosed in a case towed 
astern of a ship (see Log). 

Whether the property of the lodestone was independently dis- 
covered in Europe or introduced from the East, it does not appear to 
have been generally utilized in Europe earlier than about A.D. 1400 
(see Compass). In Europe the card or " flie " appears to have been 
attached to the magnet from the first, and the whole suspended as 
now in gimbal-rings within the " bittacle," or, as we now spell the 
word, " binnacle." The direction of a ship's head by compass was 
termed how she " capes." From the accounts extant of the stores 
supplied to ships in 1588, they appear to have usually had two 
compasses, costing 3s. 4d. each, which were kept in charge by the 
boatswain. The fact that the north point of a compass does not, jn 
most places, point to the true pole but eastward or westward of it, 
by an amount which is termed by sailors " variation," appears to 
have been noticed at an early date; but that the amount of variation 
varied in different localities appears to have been first observed by 
either Columbus or Cabot about 1490, and we find it used to be the 
practice to ascertain this error when at sea either from a bearing of 
the pole star, or by taking a mean of the compass bearings of the sun 
at both rising and setting, the deviation of the compass in the ships 
of those days being too small a quantity to be generally noticed, 
though there is a very suggestive remark on the effect of moving the 
position of any iron placed near a compass, by a Captain Sturmy of 
Bristol in 1679. In order, partially to obviate the error of the 
compass (variation), the magnets, which usually consisted of two 
steel wires joined at both ends and opened out in the middle, were not 
placed under the north and south line of the compass card, but with 
the ends about a point eastward of north and westward of south, the 
variation in London when first observed in 1580 being about n° E.; 
the change of the variation year by year at ttie same base was first 
noted by Gellibrand in 1635. 

The ' cross-staff " appears to have been used by astronomers at a 
very early period, and subsequently by seamen for measuring 

	1 .sr.g 
	JM....I,.,ti) 
	Fig. 1. 

altitudes at sea. It was one of the few instruments possessed by 
Columbus and Vasco da Gama. The old cross-staff, called by the 
Spaniards " ballestilla," consisted of two light battens. The. part 
we may call the staff was about ii in. square and 36 in. long. The 
cross was made to fit closely and to slide upon the staff at right 
angles ; its length was a little over 26 in., so as to allow the " pinules " 
or sights to be placed exactly 26 in. apart. A sight was also fixed on 
the end of the staff for the eye to look through so as to see both those 
on the cross and the objects whose distance apart was to be measured. 
It was made by describing the angles on a table, and laying the staff 
upon it (fig. 1). The scale of degrees was marked on the upper face. 
Afterwards shorter crosses were introduced, so that smaller angles 

could be m taken by the same instrument. 
These angles were marked on the sides 
of the staff. 

To observe with this instrument a 
meridian altitude of the sun the bearing 
was taken by compass, to ascertain 
when it was near the meridian; then 
the end of the long staff was placed close 
to the observer's eye, and the transver- 
sary, or cross, moved until one end exactly 
touched the horizon, 
and the other the sun's centre. This was continued until the sun 
dipped, when the meridian altitude was obtained. 

Another primitive instrument in common use at the beginning 
of the 1 6th century was the astrolabe (q.v.) t which was more con- 
venient than the cross-staff for taking altitudes. Fig. 2 represents 
an astrolabe as described by Martin Cortes. It was made of 
copper or tin, about i in. in thickness and 6 or 7 in. in diameter, 
and was circular except at one place, where a projection was provided 
for a hole by which it was suspended. Weight was ^considered 
desirable in order to keep it steady when in use. The face of the 
metal having been well polished, a plumb line from the point of 
suspension marked the vertical line, from which were derived the 
horizontal line and centre. The upper left quadrant was divided 
into degrees. The second part was a pointer pt of the same metal 
and thicknesses the circular plate, about 1 \ in. wide, and in length 
equal to the diameter of the circle. The centre was bored, and a line 
was drawn across it the full length, which was called the line of 
confidence. On the ends of that line were fixed plates, s % s, having 
each a small hole, both exactly over the line 
of confidence, as sights for the sun or stars. 
The pointer moved upon a centre the size of 
a goose quill. When the instrument was sus- 
pendedthe pointer was directed by hand to 
the object, and the angle read on the one 
quadrant only. Some years later the opposite 
quadrant was also graduated, to give the 
benefit of a second reading. The astrolabe was 
used by Vasco da Gama on his first voyage 
round the Cape of Good Hope in 1497; but 
the movement of a ship rendered accuracy 
impossible, and the liability to error was increased by the necessity 
for three observers. One held the instrument by a ring passed 
over the thumb, the second measured the altitude, and the third 
read off. 

For finding latitude at night by altitude of the pole star taken by 
cross-staff or astrolabe, use was made of an auxiliary instrument 
calledthe "nocturnal." From the relative positions of the two 
stars in the constellation of the '* Little Bear " farthest from the 
pole (known as the Fore and Hind guards) the position of the pole 
star with regard to the pole could be inferred, and tables were drawn 
up termed the " Regiment of the Pole Star," showing for eight 
positions of _ the guards how much should be added or subtracted 
from the altitude of the pole star; thus, " when the guards are in the 
N.W. bearing from each other north and south add hall a degree," 
&c. The bearings of the guards, and also roughly the hour of the 
night, were found by the nocturnal, first described by M. Coienct in 
1581. 

The nocturnal (fig. 3) consisted of two concentric circular plates, 
the outer being about 3 in. in diameter, and divided into twelve equal 
parts corresponding to the twelve months, each being again sub- 
divided into groups of five days. The inner circle was graduated into 
twenty-four eaual parts, corresponding to the hours of the day, and 
again subdivided into quarters; the handle was fixed to the outer 
circle in such a way that the middle of it corresponded with the day 
of the month on which the guards had the same right ascension as 
the sun— or, in other words, crossed the meridian at noon. From the 
^ common centre of the two circles extended a long index bar, which, 
together with the inner circle, turned freely and independently 
about this centre, which was pierced with a round hole. To use the 
instrument, the projection at twelve hours on the inner plate was 
turned until it coincided with the day of the month of observation, 
and the instrument held with its plane roughly parallel to the equi- 
noctial or celestial equator, the observer looking at the pole star 
through the hole in the centre, and turning the long central index bar 
until the guards were seen just touching its edge; the hour in 
line with this edge read off on the inner plate was, roughly, the 
time. Occasionally the nocturnal was constructed so as to find 
the time by observations of the pointers in the Great Bear. 

The rough charts used by a few of the more expert navigators at 
the time we refer to will be more fully described later (see also Map 
and GEOGRAPHY). Nautical maps or charts first appeared in Italy at 
the end of the 13th century, but it is said that the first seen in 
England was brought by Bartholomew Columbus in 1489. 

Among the earliest authors who touched upon navigation 
was John Werner of Nuremberg, who in 1514, in his notes 
upon Ptolemy's geography, describes the cross-staff as a
very ancient instrument, but says 

	Fig. 3. 

that it was only then beginning to be generally introduced 
among seamen. He recommends measuring the distance 
between the moon and a star as a means of ascertain- 
ing the longitude; but this (though developed many years 
after into the method technically known as " lunars ") was at 
this time of no practical use owing to the then imperfect know- 
ledge of the true positions of the moon and stars and the non- 
existence of instrumental means by which such distances could 
be measured with the necessary accuracy. 

Thirty-eight years after the discovery of America, when 
long voyages had become comparatively common, R. Gemma 
Frisius wrote upon astronomy and cosmogony, with the use 
of the globes. His book comprised much valuable information 
to mariners of that day, and was translated into French fifty 
years later (1582) by Claude de Bossiere. The astronomical 
system adopted is that of Ptolemy. The following are some 
of the points of interest relating to navigation. There is a good 
description of the sphere and its circles; the obliquity of the 
ecliptic is given as 23 30'. The distance between the meridians 
is to be measured on the equator, allowing 15 to an hour of time; 
longitude is to be found by eclipses of the moon and conjunctions, 
and reckoned from the Fortunate Islands (Azores). Latitude 
should be measured from the equator, not from the ecliptic, 
" as Clarean says." The use of globes is very thoroughly and 
correctly explained. The scale for measuring distances was 
placed on the equator, and 15 German leagues, or 60 Italian 
leagues, were to be considered equal to one degree. The Italian 
league was 8 stadia, or 1000 paces, therefore the degree is taken 
much too small. We are told that, on plane charts, mariners 
drew lines from various centres (i.e. compass courses), which 
were very useful since the virtue of the lodestone had become 
recognized; it must be remembered that parallel rulers were 
unknown, being invented by Mordente in 1 584. Such a confusion 
of lines has been continued upon sea charts till comparatively 
recently. Gemma gives rules for finding the course and distance 
correctly, except that he treats difference of longitude as 
departure. For instance, if the difference of latitude and 
difference of longitude are equal, the course prescribed is between 
the two principal winds — that is, 45 . He points out that the 
courses thus followed are not straight lines, but curves, because 
they do not follow the great circle, and that distances could be 
more correctly measured on the globe than on charts. The tide is 
said to rise with the moon, high water being when it is on the 
meridian and 12 hours later. From a table of latitudes and 
longitudes a few examples are here selected, by which it appears 
that even latitude was much in error. The figures in brackets 

	Alexandria 
	• 3i° 
	0' 
	Athens . 
	• 37 
	15 
	Babylon . 
	• 35 
	Dantzic . 
	• 54 
	30 
	London . 
	• 52 
	3 
	Malta . 
	• 34 
	Rome 
	. 4i 
	50 
	130- 
	60° 30' E. 
	55° 55 ) 
	58) 
	52 45 
	(49 46) 
	32) 
	79 
	(70 25 
	21) 
	44 15 
	(44 38) 
	30 
	19 15 
	(25 54) 
	43) 
	38 45 
	(40 30 
	54) 
	36 20 
	(38 30) 

represent the positions according to modern tables, counting 
the longitude from the western extremity of St Michael. (Flores 
is 5 8' farther west.) 

	o'N. (31 ' 
	(37 
	(32 
	(54 
	(35 
	(41 

The latitude of Cape Clear is given 34' in- error, and the 
longitude 4^°; tbe Scilly Islands are given with an error of 
one degree in latitude and i°'io' in longitude; while Madeira 
is placed 3 8' too far soutb and 4 20' too far west, and Cape 
St Vincent i° 25' too far south and 6° too far west. 

In 1534 Gemma produced an " astronomical ring," which he 
dedicated to the secretary of the king of Hungary. He admitted 
that it was not entirely his own invention, but asserted that 
it could accomplish all that had been said of quadrants, cylinders 
and astrolabes — also that it was a pretty ornament, worthy 
of a prince. As it displayed great ingenuity, and was followed 
by many similar contrivances during two centuries, a sketch 
with brief description is here given (fig. 4). 

The outer and principal sustaining circle EPQ represents the 
meridian, and is about 6 in. in diameter; Px, are the poles. The 
upper quadrant is divided into degrees. It is sus- 
pended by fine cord or wire placed at the sup- 
posed latitude. The second circle EQ is fixed 
at right angles to the first, and represents the 
equinoctial line. The upper side is divided into 
twenty-four parts, representing the hours from 
noon or midnight. On the inner side of that 
circle are marked the months and weeks. The 
third ring CC is attached to the first at the poles, 
and revolves freely within it. On the interior are 
marked the months, and on another side the cor- 
responding signs of the zodiac; another is gradu- 
ated in degrees. It is fitted with a groove 
On the fourth side are 

	Fig. 4. 

	which carries two movable sights, 

twenty-four unequal divisions (tangents) for measuring heights. 
Its use is illustrated by twenty problems, showing it capable of 
doing roughly all that any instrument for taking angles can. Thus, to 
find the latitude, set the sights C, C to the place of the sun in the 
zodiac, and shut the circle till it corresponds with 12 o'clock. Look 
through the sights and alter the point of suspension till the greatest 
elevation is attained; that time will be noon, and the point of sus- 
pension will be the latitude. The figure is represented as slung at 
fat. 40 , either north or south. To find the hour of theday, the 
latitude and declination being known: the sights C, C being set to 
the declination as before, and the suspension on the latitude, turn the 
ring CC freely till it points to the sun, when the index opposite the 
equinoctial circle will indicate the time, while the meridional circle 
will coincide with the meridian of the place. 

There is in the museum attached to the Royal Naval College 
at Greenwich an instrument described as Sir Francis Drake's 
astrolahe. It is not an astrolabe, but may be a combination 
of astronomical rings as invented by Gemma with additions, 
probably of a later date. It has the appearance of a large gold 
watch, about i\ in. in diameter, and contains several parts 
which fall back on hinges. One is a sun-dial, the gnomon being 
in connexion with a graduated quadrant, by which it could 
be set to the latitude of the place. There are a small compass 
and an hour circle. It is very neat, but too small for actual 
use, and may he simply an ornament representing a larger 
instrument. There is a table of latitudes engraved inside one 
lid; that given for London is 51° 34', about 3 m. too much. 

Though clocks are mentioned in 1484 as recent inventions, 
watches were unknown till about 1 530, when Gemma seized the 
idea of utilizing them for the purpose of ascertaining the difference 
of longitude between two places by a comparison between their 
local times at the same instant. They were too inaccurate, 
however, to be of practical use, and their advocate proposed 
to correct them by water-clocks cr sand-clocks. For rough 
purposes. of keeping time on board ship sand glasses were em- 
ployed, and it is curious to note that hour and half-hour glasses 
were used for this purpose in the British Navy until 1839. The 
outer margin of the compass card was early divided into twenty- 
four equal parts numbered as hours until the error of thus 
determining time by the bearings of tbe sun was pointed out 
by Davis in 1607. 

In 1537 Pedro Nunez (Nonius), cosmographer to the king 
of Portugal, published a work on astronomy, charts and some 
points of navigation. He recognized the errors in plane charts, 
and tried to rectify them. Among many astronomical problems 
given is one for finding the latitude of a place by knowing the 
sun's declination and altitude when on two bearings, not 
less than 40 apart. Gemma did a similar thing with two stars; 
therefore the problem now known as a " double altitude " is 
a very old one. It could be mechanically solved on a large 
globe within a degree. To Nunez has been erroneously attributed 
the present mode of reading the exact angle on a sextant, the 
scale of a barometer, &c, the credit of which is due, however, 
to Vernier nearly a hundred years later. The mode of dividing 
the scale which Nunez published in 1542 was the following. 
The arc of a* large quadrant was furnished with forty-five con- 
centric segments, or scales, the outer graduated to oo°, the 
others to 89, 88, 87, &c, divisions. As the fine edge of tbe 
pointer attached to the sights passed among those numerous 
divisions it touched one of them, suppose the fifteenth division 
on the sixth scale, then the angle was \fc of 9o° = i5° 52' 56*. 
This was a laborious method; Tycho Brahe tried it, but aban- 
doned it in favour of the diagonal lines then in common use, 
and still found on all scales of equal parts. 

In 1545 Pedro de Medina published Arte de navigar at Valla- 
dolid, dedicated to Don Philippo, prince of Spain. This appears 
to be the first book ever published professedly entirely on naviga- 
tion. It was soon translated into French and Italian, and many 
years after into English by John Frampton. Though this pre- 
tentious work came out two years after the death of Copernicus, 
the astronomy is still that of Ptolemy. The general appearance 
of the chart given of the Mediterranean, Atlantic, and part of 
the Pacific is in its favour, hut examination shows it to be very 
incorrect. A scale of equal parts, near the centre of the chart, 
extends from the equator to what is intended to represent 
75 of latitude; by this scale London would be in 55 instead 
of 5i£°, Lisbon in 37^° instead of 38 42'. The equator is made 
to pass along the coast of Guinea, instead of being over four 
degrees farther south. The Gulf of Guinea extends 14 too 
far east, and Mexico is much too far west. Though there are 
many vertical lines on the chart at unequal distances they do 
not represent meridians; and there is no indication of longi- 
tude. A scale of 600 leagues is given (German leagues, fifteen 
to a degree). By this scale the distance between Lisbon and 
the city of Mexico is 1740 leagues, or 6960 miles; by the vertical 
scale of degrees it would be about the same; whereas the actual 
distance is 4820 miles. Here two great wants become apparent — 
a knowledge of the actual length of any arc, and the means 
of representing the surface of the globe on flat paper. There 
is a table of the sun's declination to minutes; on June 12th and 
December nth (o.s.) it was given as 23 33'. The directions 
for finding the latitude by the pole star and pointers appear 
good. For general astronomical information the book is inferior 
to that of Gemma. 

In 1556 Martin Cortes published at Seville Arte de navigar. 
He gives a good drawing of the cross-staff and astrolabe, also 
a table of the sun's declination for four years (the greatest value 
heing 23 33'), and a calendar of saints' days. The motions 
of the heavens are described according to the notions then 
prevalent, the earth being considered as fixed. He recommends 
the altitude of the pole being found frequently, as the esti- 
mated distance run was imperfect. He devised an instrument 
whereby to tell the hour, the direction of the ship's head, and 
where the sun would set. A very correct table is given of the 
distances between the meridians at every degree of latitude, 
whereby a seaman could easily reduce the difference of longitude 
to departure. In the rules for finding the latitude by the 
pole star, that star is supposed to be 3 from the pole. Martin 
Cortes attributes the tides entirely to the influence of the moon, 
and gives instructions for finding the time of high water at Cadiz, 
when by means of a card with the moon's age on it, revolving 
within a circle showing the hours and minutes, the time of high 
water at any other place for which it was set would be indicated. 
Directions are given for making a compass similar to those then 
in common use, also for ascertaining and allowing for the varia- 
tion. The east is here spoken of as the principal point, and 
marked by a cross. 

The third part of Martin Cortes's work is upon charts; he 
laments that wise men do not produce some that are correct, 
and that pilots and mariners will use plane charts which are 
not true. In the Mediterranean and " Channel of Flanders" 
the want of good charts is (he says) less inconvenient, as they 
do not navigate by the altitude of the pole. 

As some subsequent writers have attributed to Cortes the credit 
of first thinking of the enlargement of the degrees of latitude on 
M creator's principle, his precise words may be cited. In making a 
chart, it is recommended to choose a well-known place near the 
centre of the intended chart, such as Cape St Vincent, which call 
37 , " and from thence towards the Arctic pole the degrees increase; 
and from thence to the equinoctial line they go on decreasing, and 
from the line to the Antarctic pole increasing. " It would appear 
at first sight that this implied that the degrees increased in length as 
well as being called by a higher number, but a specimen chart in the 
book does not justify that conclusion. It is from 34 to 40 , and the 
divisions' are unequal, but evidently by accident, as the highest and 
lowest are the longest. He states that the Spanish scale was formed 
by counting the Great Berling as 3 from Cape St Vincent (it is under 
2j°). Twenty English leagues are equal to 17J Spanish or 25 French, 
and to i° of latitude. Cortes was evidently at a loss to know the 
length of a degree, and consequently the circumference of the globe. 
The degrees of longitude are not laid down, but for a first meridian 
we are told to draw a vertical line " through the Azores, or nearer 
Spain, where the chart is less occupied." It is impossible^ in such 
circumstances to understand or check the longitudes assigned to 
places at that period. Martin Cortes's work was held in high estima- 
tion in England for many years, and appeared in several translations. 
A reprint, with additions, of Richard Eden's (1561), by John 
Tapp and published in 1609, gives an improved table of the 
sun's declination from 1609 to 1625 — the maximum value being 
23 to 30'. The declinations of the principal stars, the times of their 
passing the meridian, and other improved tables, are given, with 
a very poor traverse table for eight points. The cross-staff, he 
said, was in most common use; but he recommends Wright's sea 
quadrant. 

William Cuningham published in 1559 a book called his 
Astronomical Glass, in which he teaches the making of charts 
by a central meridional b'ne divided into equal parts, with other 
meridians on each side, distant at top and bottom in proportion 
to the departure at the highest and lowest latitude, for which 
purpose a table of departures is given very correctly to the third 
place of sexagesimals. The chart would be excellent were it not 
that the parallels are drawn straight instead of being curved. 
In another example, which shows one-fourth of the sphere, the 
meridians and parallels are all curved; it would be good were 
it not that the former are too long. .The hemisphere is also 
shown upon a projection approaching the stereographic; but 
the eighteen meridians cut the equator at equal distances apart 
instead 'of being nearer together towards the primitive. He 
gives the drawing of an instrument like an astrolabe placed 
horizontally, divided into 32 points and 360 degrees, and carrying 
a small magnetic needle to be used as a prismatic compass, 
or even as a theodolite. 

In 1581 Michael Coignet of Antwerp published sea charts, and 
also a small treatise in French, wherein he exposes the errors of 
Medina, and was probably the first who said that rhumb lines 
form spirals round the pole. He published also tables of declina- 
tion of the sun and observed the gradual decrease in the obliquity 
of the ecliptic. He described a cross-staff with three transverse 
pieces, which was then in common use at sea. Coignet died in 
1623. 

The Dutch published charts made up as atlases as early as 
1584, with a treatise on navigation as an introduction. 

In 1585 Roderico Zamorano, who was then lecturer at the naval 
college at Seville, published a concise and clearly-written com- 
pendium of navigation; he follows Cortes in the desire to obtain 
better charts. Andres Garcia de Cespedes, the successor of 
Zamorano at Seville, published a treatise on navigation at Madrid 
in 1606. In 1592 Petrus Plancius published his universal map, 
containing the discoveries in the East and West Indies and 
towards the north pole. It possessed no particular merit; the 
degrees of latitude are equal, but the distances between the 
meridians are varied. He made London appear in 51 32' N. 
and long. 22 , by which his first meridian should have been 
more than 3 east of St Michael. 

For Mercator's great improvements in charts at about this date 
see Map; from facsimiles of his early charts in Jomard, Les 
Monuments de la geographie, the following measurements have 
been made. A general chart in 1569 of North America, from 
lat. 25 to lat. 79 , is 2 ft. long north and south, and 20 in. wide. 
Another of the same date, from the equator to 6o° south lat. 
is 15-8 in. long. The charts agree with each other, a slight 
allowance being made for remeasuring. As compared with 
J. Inman's table of meridional parts, the spaces between the 
parallels are all too small. Between o° and io° the error is 8' ; at 
20 it is 5'; at 30 , 16'; at 40 , 39'; at 50 , 6i'; at 6o°, 104'; 
at 70 , 158' ; and at 79 , 182' — that is, over three degrees upon 
the whole chart. As the measures are always less than the 
truth it is possible that Mercator was afraid to give the whole. 
In a chart of Sicily by Romoldus Mercator in 1589, on which 
two equal degrees of latitude, 36 to 38 , extend 9^ in., the 
degree of longitude is quite correct at one-fourth from the top; 
the lower part is 1 m. too long. One of the north of Scotland, 
published in 1595, by Romoldus, measures 10J in. from 58 20' 
to 6i° ; the divisions are quite equal and the lines parallel; 
it is correct at the centre only. A map of Norway, 1595, lat. 6o° 
to 70°= g\ in., has the parallels curved and equidistant, the 
meridians" straight converging lines; the spaces between the 
meridians at 6o° and 70 are quite correct. 

In 1594 Blundeville published a description of Mercator's 
charts and globes; he confesses to not having known upon what 
rule the meridians were separated by Mercator, unless upon such 
a table as that given by Wright, whose table of meridional parts 
is published in the same book, also an excellent table of sines, 
tangents and secants — the former to seven figures, the latter 
to eight. These are the tables made originally by Regiomontanus 
and improved by Clavius. 

In 1594 the celebrated navigator John Davis published a 
pamphlet of eighty pages, in black letter, entitled The Seaman's 
Secrets, in which he proposes to give all that is necessary for 
sailors — not for scholars on shore. He defines three kinds of 
sailing: horizontal, paradoxical and great circle. His horizontal 
sailing consists of short voyages which may be delineated upon 
a plain sheet of paper. The paradoxical or cosmographical 
embraces longitude, latitude and distance — the combining many 
horizontal courses into' one " infallible and true," i.e. what is 
now called traverse and Mercator's sailings. His " paradoxical 
course " he describes correctly as a rhumb line which is straight 
on the chart and a curve on the globe. He points out the errors 
of the common or plane chart, and promises if spared to publish 
a " paradoxall chart." It is not known whether such appeared 
or not, but he assisted Wright in producing his chart on what 
is known as Mercator's projection a few years later. Great 
circle sailing on a globe is clearly described by Davis, and to 
render it more practicable he divides a long distance into several 
short rhumb lines quite correctly. From the practice of 
navigators in using globes the principles of such sailing were not 
unknown at an earlier date; indeed it is said that S. Cabot 
projected a voyage across the North Atlantic on the arc of a 
great circle in 1495. 

The list of instruments given by Davis as necessary to a skilful 
seaman comprises the sea compass, cross-staff, chart, quadrant, 
astrolabe, an " instrument magnetical " for finding the variation of 
the compass, a horizontal plane sphere, a globe and a paradoxical 
compass. The first three are said to be sufficient for use at sea, the 
astrolabe and quadrant being uncertain for sea observations. The 
importance of knowing the times of the tides when approaching tidal 
or barred harbours is clearly pointed out, also the mode of ascertain- 
ing them by the moon's age. A table of the sun's declination is given 
for noon each day during four years 1 593-1 597, from the ephemerides 
of J. Stadius. The greatest given value is 23 28'. Several courses 
and distances, with the resulting difference of latitude and de- 
parture, "are correctly worked out. A specimen log-book provides one 
fine only for each day, but the columns are arranged similarly to 
those of a modern log. Under the head of remarks after leaving 
Brazil, we read, " the compass varied 9 , the south point westward." 
He states that the first meridian passed through St Michael, because 
there was no variation at that place, and therefore that this meridian 
passed through the magnetic pole as well as the pole of the earth. 
He makes no mention of Mereator's chart by name nor of Cortes or 
other writers on navigation. Rules are given for finding the latitude 
by two altitudes of the sun and intermediate azimuth, also bytwo 
fixed stars, using a globe. There is a drawing of a quadrant, with a 
plumb line, for measuring the zenith distance, and one of a modifica- 
tion of a cross-staff using which the observer stands with his back to 
the sun, looking at the horizon through a sight on the end of the 
staff, while the shadow of the top of a movable projection, falls on the 
sight; this, known as the back-staff, was an improvement on the 
cross-staff. It was fitted with a reflector, and was thus the first 
rough idea of the principle of the quadrant and sextant. This 
remained in common use till superseded in 1731 by Hadley's quad- 
rant. The eighth edition of Davis's work was printed in 1657. 

Edward Wright, of Caius College, Cambridge, published in 
1599 a valuable work entitled Certain Errors in Navigation 
Detected and Corrected. One part is a translation from Roderico 
Zamorano; there is a chapter from Cortes and one from Nunez. 
A year later appeared his chart of the world, upon which both 
capes and the recent discoveries in the East Indies and America 
are laid down truthfully and scientifically, as well as his know- 
ledge of their latitudes and longitudes would admit. Just the 
northern extremity of Australia is shown. 

Wright said of himself that he had striven beyond his ability to 
mend the errors in chart, compass, cross-staff and declination of sun 
and stars. He considered that the instruments which had then 
recently come in use " could hardly be amended," as they were 
growing to " perfection " — especially the sea chart and the compass, 
though he expresses a hope that the latter may be " freed from that 
rude and gross manner of handling in the making." He gives a table 
of magnetic declinations (variation) and explains its geometrical 
construction. He states that Medina utterly denied the existence of 
variation, and attributed it to bad construction and bad observa- 
tions. Wright expresses a hope that a right understanding of the dip 
of the needle would lead to a knowledge of the latitude, " as the 
variation did of the longitude." He gives a table of declination of 
the sun for the use of English manners during four years — the 
greatest given value being 23 31' 30'. The latitude of London he 
made 51 32'. For these determinations a quadrant over 6 ft. in 
radius was used. He also treats of the " dip " of the sea horizon, 
refraction, parallax and the sun's motions. With all this knowledge 
the earth is still considered as stationary — although Wright alludes 
to Copernicus, and says that he omitted to allow for parallax. 
Wright ascertained the declinations of thirty-two stars, and made 
many improvements or additions to the art of navigation, considering 
that all the problems could be performed trijpnometrically, without 
globe or chart. He devised sea rings for taking observations, and a 
sea quadrant to be used by two persons, which is in some respects 
similar to that by Davis. While deploring the neglected state which 
navigation had been in, he rejoices that the worshipful society at the 
Trinity House (which had been established in 1514), under the favour 
of the king (Henry VI II.) ■ had removed " many gross and dangerous 
enormities." He joins the brethren of the Trinity House in the 
desire that a lectureship should be established on navigation, as at 
Sevilleand Cadiz; also that a grand pilot should be appointed, as 
Sebastian Cabot had been in Spain, to examine pilots (i.e. mates) and 
navigators. ^ Wright's desire was partially fulfilled in 1845, when an 
Act of Parliament paved the way for the compulsory qualification 
of masters and mates of merchant ships ; but such was the opposition 
by shipowners that it was even then left voluntary for a few years. 
England was in this respect more than a century behind Holland. 
It has been said that Wright accompanied the carl of Cumberland to 
the Azores in 1589, and that he was allowed £50 a year by the East 
India Company as lecturer on navigation at Gresham College, Tower 
Street. 

The great mark which Wright made was the discovery of a 
correct and uniform method of dividing the meridional line and 
making charts which are still called after the name of Mercator. 
He considered such charts as true as 'the globe itself; and so 
they were for all practical purposes. He commenced by dividing 
a meridional line, in the proportion of the secants of the latitude, 
for every ten minutes of arc, and in the edition of his work 
published in 16 10 his calculations are for every minute. His 
method was based upon the fact that the radius bears the same 
proportion to the secant of the latitude as the difference of 
longitude does to the meridional difference of latitude — a rule 
strictly correct for small arcs only. One minute is taken as the 
unit upon the arc and 10,000 as the corresponding secant, 2' 
becomes 20,000, 3' = 30,000, &c, increasing uniformly till 49', 
which is equal to 490,001; i° is 600,012. The secant of 20 
is 12,251,192, and for 20 1' it will be 12,251,192+10,642 — 
practically the same as that used in modern tables. 

The principle is simply explained by fig. 5, where b is the pole and 
bf the meridian. At any point a a minute of longitude: a min. of 
lat.: : ea (the semi-diameter of the parallel): kf 
(the radius). Again ea : kf : : kf : ki : : radius : sec. 
akf (sec. of lat). To keep this proportion on the 
chart, the distances between points of latitude 
must increase in the same proportion as the 
secants of the are contained between those points 
and the equator, which was then to be done by the 
" canon of triangles." 

Wright gave the following excellent popular de- 
scription of the principle of Mereator's charts. 
" Suppose a spherical globe (representing the 
world) inscribed in a concave cylinder to swell 
like a bladder equally in every part (that is as 
much in longitude as in latitude) until it joins 
itself to the concave surface of the cylinder, each parallel in- 
creasing successively from the equator towards either pole until 
it is of equal diameter to the cylinder, and consequently the 
meridians widening apart until they are everywhere as distant 
from each other as they are at the equator. Such a spherical surface 
is thus by extension made cylindrical, and consequently a plane 
parallelogram surface, since the surface of a cylinder is nothing else 
but a plane parallelogram surface wound round it. Such a cylinder 
on being opened into a flat surface will have upon it a representation 
of a Mereator's chart of the world." 

This great improvement in the principle of constructing charts 
was adopted slowly by seamen, who, putting it as they supposed 
to a practical test, found good reason to be disappointed. The 
positions of most places in the world had been originally laid 
down erroneously, by very rough courses and estimated distances 
upon the plane chart, and from this they were transferred 
to the new projection, so that errors in courses and distances, 
really due to erroneous positions, were wrongly attributed to the 
new and accurate form of chart. 

When Napier's Canon Mirificus appeared in 1614, Wright at 
once recognized the value of logarithms as an aid to navigation, 
and undertook a translation of the book, which he did not live to 
publish (see Napier). Gunter's tables (1620) made the applica- 
tion of the new discovery to navigation possible, and this was 
done by Addison in his Arithmetical Navigation (1625), as well as 
by Gunter in his tables of 1624 and 1636, which gave logarithmic 
sines and tangents, to a radius of 1,000,000, with directions for 
their use and application to astronomy and navigation, and also 
logarithms of numbers from 1 to 10,000. Several editions 
followed, and the work retained its reputation over a century. 
Gunter invented the sector, and introduced the meridional line 
upon it, in the just proportion of Mereator's projection. 

The means of taking observations correctly, either at sea or 
on shore, was about this time greatly assisted by the invention 
bearing the name of Pierre Vernier, the description of which was 
published at Brussels in 163 1. As Vernier *s quadrant was 
divided into half degrees only, the sector, as he called it, spread 
over 14J degrees, and that space carried thirty equal divisions, 
numbered from o to 30. As each division of the sector contained 
29 min. of arc, the vernier could be read to minutes. The verniers 
now commonly adapted to sextants can be read to 10 sees. 
Shortly after the invention it was recommended for use by P. 
Bouguer and Jorge Juan, who describe it in a treatise entitled 
La Construction, &c. t du quadrant nouveau. About this period 
Gascoigne applied the telescope to the quadrant as used on 
shore; and Hevelius invented the tangent screw, to give slow 
and steady motion when near the desired position. These 
practical improvements were not applied to the rougher nautical 
instruments until the invention of Hadley's sextant in 1731. 

In 1635 Henry Gellibrand published his discovery of the annual 
change in variation of the needle, which was effected by compar- 
ing the results of his own observations with those of W. Borough 
and Edmund Gunter. The latter was his predecessor at Gresham 
College. 

In 1637 Richard Norwood, a sailor, and reader in mathematics, 
published an account of his most laudable exertions to remove 
one of the greatest stumbling-blocks in the way of correct 
navigation, that of not knowing the true length of a degree or 
nautical mile, in a pamphlet styled The Seaman's Practices. 
Norwood ascertained the latitude of a position near the Tower 
of London in June 1633, and of a place in the centre of York 
in June 1635, with a sextant of more than 5 ft. radius, and, 
having carefully corrected the declination of the sun and allowed 
for refraction and parallax, made the difference of latitude 
2 28'. He then measured the distance with a chain, taking 
horizontal angles of all windings, and made a special table for 
correcting elevations and depressions. A few places which he 
was unable to measure he paced. His conclusion was that a 
degree contained 367,176 English feet; this gives 2040 yds. 
to a nautical mile — only about 12 yds. too much. Norwood's 
work went through numerous editions, and retained its popularity 
over a hundred years. In a late edition he says that, as there 
is no means of discovering the longitude, a seaman must trust 
to his reckoning. He recommends the knots on the log-line 
to be placed 51 ft. apart, as the just proportion to a mile when 
used with the half-minute glass. To Norwood is also attributed 
the discovery of the " dip " of the magnetic needle in 1576. 

The progress of the art of navigation was and is still of course 
inseparably connected with that of map and chart drawing and 
the correct astronomical determinations of positions on land. 
While as we have seen at an early period simple practical astro- 
nomical means of finding the latitude at sea were known and in 
use, no mode could be devised of finding longitude except by 
the rough method of estimating the run of the ship, so that the 
only mode of arriving at a port of destination was to steer so as to 
get into the latitude of such a port either to the eastward or west- 
ward of its supposed position, and then approach it on the parallel 
of its latitude. The success of this method would of course greatly 
depend upon the accuracy with which the longitude of such 
port was known. Even with the larger and more accurate 
instruments used in astronomical observatories on shore the 
means of ascertaining latitude were far in advance of those by 
which longitude could be obtained, and this equally applied 
to the various heavenly bodies themselves upon which the 
terrestrial positions depended, the astronomical element of 
declination (corresponding to latitude) being far more accurately 
determined than that of right ascension (corresponding to 
longitude). 

Almanacs were first published on the continent of Europe in 
1457, but the earliest printed work of that kind in England is 
dated 1497. The only portions of their contents of use to seamen 
were tables of the declination of the sun, rough elements of the 
positions of a few stars, and tables for finding latitude by the 
pole star. 

No accurate predictions of the positions of the moon, stars 
and planets could, however, be made until the laws governing 
their movements were known, such laws of course involving a 
knowledge of their actual positions at different widely separated 
epochs. 

In 1699 Edmund Halley (subsequently astronomer royal), in 
command of the " Paramour," undertook a voyage to improve 
the knowledge of longitude and of the variation of the compass. 
The results of his voyage were the construction of the first 
variation chart, and proposals for finding the longitude by 
occultations of fixed stars. 

The necessity for having more correct charts being equalled by 
the pressing need of obtaining the longitude by some simple and 
correct means available to seamen, many plans had already been 
thought of for this purpose. At one time it was hoped that the 
longitude might be directly discovered by observing the variation 

	xrx. 10 

of the compass and comparing it with that laid down on charts. 
In 1674 Charles II. actually appointed a commission to investigate 
the pretensions of a scheme of this sort devised by Henry Bond, and 
the same idea appears as late as 1777 in S. Dunn's Epitome. But the 
only accurate method of ascertaining the longitude is by knowing the 
difference of time at the same instant at the meridian of the observer 
and that of Greenwich; and till the invention and perfecting of 
chronometers this could only be done by finding at two such places 
the apparent time of the same celestial phenomenon. 

A class of phenomena whose comparative frequency recommended 
them^ for longitude observations, viz. the eclipses of Jupiter's 
satellites, became known through Galileo's discovery of these bodies 
(1610). Tables for such eclipses were published by Dominic Cassini 
at Bologna in 1688, and repeated in a more correct form at Paris in 
1693 by his son, who was followed by J. Pound, J. Bradley, P. W. 
Wargentin, and many other astronomers. But this method, though 
useful on land, is not suited to mariners; when W. Whiston, lor 
example, in 1737 recommended that the satellites should be ob- 
served by a reflecting telescope, he did not sufficiently consider the 
difficulty of using a telescope at sea. 

Another method proposed was that of comparing the local time 
of the moon's crossing the meridian of the observer with the predicted 
time of the same event at Greenwich, the difference of the two de- 
pending upon the moon's motion during the time represented by the 
longitude; thus Heme's Longitude Unveiled (1678), proposes to find 
the time of the moon's meridian passage at sea by equal altitudes with 
the cross-staff, and then compare apparent time at ship with London 
time. The accuracy of this, as in the case of lunar problems, would 
obviously depend upon a more perfect knowledge of the laws of the 
moon's motion than then existed. 

The celebrated problem of finding longitude by lunars (or by 
measurement of lunar distances ") occupied the attention of 
astronomers and sailors for many years before being superseded by 
the mere simple and accurate modern method by the use of chrono- 
meters, and was the principal reason for establishing the Royal 
Observatory at Greenwich and the subsequent publication of the 
Nautical Almanac^ The principle was simple^ depending upon the 
comparatively rapid movement of the moon with regard to the 
heavenly bodies lying in her immediate path in the heavens. It is 
evident that if the theory of this movement were perfectly under- 
stood and the positions of such heavenly bodies accurately deter- 
mined, the distances of the moon from those at any instant of time at 
Greenwich could be accurately foretold so that if such predictions 
were published in advance, an observer at any place in the world, by 
simply measuring such distances, could accurately determine the 
Greenwich time, a comparison of which with the local time (which in 
clear weather can be frequently and simply determined) would give 
the longitude. This, as previously mentioned, was foreseen by J. 
Werner as early as 1 5 14, but very great difficulties attendee! its 
practical application for many years. Until the establishment of 
national astronomical observatories it was impossible to accumulate 
the vast number of observations necessary to fulfil the astronomical 
conditions, and until the invention of the sextant no instrument 
existed capable of use at sea which would measure the distances 
required with the necessary accuracy, while even up to the time when 
the problem had attained its greatest practical accuracy the calcula- 
tions involved were far too intricate for general use among those for 
whom it was chiefly intended. The very principles of a theory of the 
movements of the moon were unknown before Newton's time, when 
the lunar problem begins to have a chief place in the history of 
navigation; the places of stars were formerly derived from various 
and widely discrepant sources. 

The study of the lunar problem was stimulated by the reward of 
1000 crowns offered by Philip IILof Spain in 1598 for the dis- 
covery of a method of finding longitude at sea; the States-general 
followed with an offer of 10,000 florins. But for a long time nothing 
practical came of this; a proposal by J. B. Morin, submitted to 
Richelieu in 1633, was pronounced by commissioners appointed to 
judge of it to be impracticable through the imperfection of the lunar 
tables, and the same objection applied when the question was raised 
in England in 1674 by a proposal of St Pierre to find the longitude by 
using the altitudes of the moon and two stars to find the time each 
was from the meridian. When the kingwas pressed by St Pierre, 
Sir J. Moore and Sir C. Wren to establish an observatory for the 
benefit of navigation, and especially that the moon's exact position 
might be calculated a year in advance, Flamsteed gave his judgment 
that the lunar tables then in use were quite useless, and the positions 
of the stars erroneous. The result was that the king decided upon 
establishing an observatory in Greenwich Park, and Flamsteed was 
appointed astronomical observer on March 4, 1675, upon a salary of 
£100 a year, for which also he was to instruct two boys from Christ's 
Hospital. While the small building in the Park was in course of 
erection he resided in the Queen's House (now the central part of 
Greenwich Hospital school), and removed to the house on the hill 
on the 10th of July 1676, which came to be known as " Flamsteed 
House." The institution was placed under the surveyor-general of 
ordnance — perhaps because that office was then held by Sir Jonas 
Moore, himself an eminent mathematician. Though this was not the 
first observatory in Europe, it was destined to become the^ most 
useful, and has amply fulfilled the important duties for which it was 
designed. It was established to meet the exigencies of navigation, 
as was clearly stated on the appointment of Flamsteed, and on 
several subsequent occasions; we see now what an excellent foster- 
mother it has been to the higher branches of that science. This has 
been accomplished by much labour and patience; for, though 
originally the most suitable man in the kingdom was placed in 
charge, it was so starved and neglected as to be almost useless during 
many years. The government did not provide a single instrument. 
Flamsteed entered upon his important duties with an iron sextant of 
7 ft. radius, a quadrant of 3 ft. radius, two telescopes and two clocks, 
the last given by Sir Jonas Moore. Tycho Brahe's catalogue of 777 
stars, formed in about 1590, was his only guide. In 1681 he fitted a 
mural arc which proved a failure. Seven years after another mural 
arc was erected at a cost of £120, with which he set to work in 
earnest to verify the latitude, and to determine the position of the 
equinoctial point, the obliquity of the ecliptic and the right ascen- 
sions and declinations of the stars; he obtained the positions of 
2884 which appeared in the " British catalogue " in 1723 (see 
Flamsteed, and Astronomy). 

Flamsteed died in 1719, and was succeeded by Halley, who paid 
particular attention to the motions of the moon with a view to the 
longitude problem. A paper which he published in the Phil. Trans. 
(1731) shows what had been accomplished up to that date, and 
proves that it was still impossible to find the longitude correctly by 
any observation depending upon the predicted position of the moon. 
He repeats what he had published twenty years before in an appendix 
to Thomas Street's Caroline tables, which contained observations 
made by him (Halley) in 1 683-1 684 for ascertaining the moon's 
motion, which he thought to be the only practical method of 
" attaining " the longitude at sea. The Caroline tables of Street, 
though better than those before his time as well as those of Tycho, 
Kepler, Bullialdus and Horrox, were uncertain; sometimes the 
errors would compensate one another; at others when they fell the 
same way the result might lead to a position being 100 leagues in 
error. He hopes that the tables will be so amended that an error 
may scarce ever exceed 3 minutes of arc (equal to i£° of longitude). 
Sir Isaac Newton's tables, corrected by himself (Halley) and others 
up to 1713, would admit of errors of 5 minutes, when the moon was 
in the third and fourth quarters. He blames Flamsteed for neglecting 
that portion of astronomical work, as he was at the observatory more 
than two periods of eighteen years. He himself had at this time seen 
the whole period of the moon s apogee — less than nine years — during 
which he observed the right ascensions at her transit, with great 
exactness, almost fifteen hundred times, or as often as Tycho Brahe, 
Hevelius and Flamsteed together. He hoped to be able to compute 
the moon's position within 2 minutes of arc with certainty, which 
would reduce errors of position to 20 leagues at the equator and 15 in 
the Channel; he thought Hadley's quadrant might be applied to 
measure lunar distances at sea with the desired accuracy. 1 

The rise of modern navigation may be fairly dated from the 
invention of the sextant in 1731 and of the chronometer in 1735; 
the former a complete nautical observatory in itself, and the 
latter an instrument which in its modern development has 
become an almost perfect time-keeper. It was a curious co- 
incidence that these two invaluable instruments were invented 
at so nearly the same time. Until 1731 all instruments in use 
at sea for measuring angles either depended on a plumb line or 
required the observer to look in two directions at once. 

Their imperfections are clearly pointed out in a paper by Pierre 
Bouguer (1729) which received the prize of the Paris Academy of 
Sciences for the best method of taking the altitude of stars at sea. 
Bouguer himself proposes a modification of what he calls the English 
quadrant, probably the one suggested by Wright and improved by 
Davis. t Fig. 6 represents the instrument as proposed, capable of 
measuring Fully 90 from E to N. A fixed pinule was recommended 
to be placed at E, through which a ray from the sun would pass to 
the sight C. The sight F was movable. The observer, standing with 
his back to the sun would look through Fand C at the horizon, shifting 
the sight F up or down till the ray from the sun coincided with the 
horizon. The space from E to F would represent the altitude, and 
the remaining part F to N the zenith distance. The English quad- 
rant which this was to supersede differed in having about half the 
arc from E towards N, and, instead of the pinule being fixed at E, 
it was on a smaller arc represented by the dotted line eB f and 
movable. It was placed on an even number of degrees, considerably 
less than the altitude; the remainder was measured on the larger arc, 
as described. 

	1 Halley's observations were published posthumously in 1742, and 
	in 1765 the commissioners of longitude paid his daughter £100 for 
	MSS. supposed to be useful to navigation. As the moon passes the 
	stars lying in her course through the heavens at the mean rate of 33* 
	in one minute of time, it is obvious that an error to that amount in 
	measuring the distance from a star would produce an error of 15 m. 
	in longitude. As the moon's motion with regard to the sun is nearly 
	one degree a day less, a similar error in the distance would produce 
	still more effect. 

	Fig. 6. 

Hadley's instrument, on the other hand, described to the 
Royal Society in May 1731 (Phil. Trans.), embodies Newton's 
idea of bringing the reflection of one object to coincide with the # 
direct image of the other. He calls it an octant, as the arc is* 
actually 45 , or the eighth part of a circle; but, in consequence 
of the angles of incidence and reflection both being changed 
by a movement of the index, it measures an angle of 90 , and 
is graduated accordingly; the same instrument has therefore 
been called a quadrant. It was very slowly adopted, and no 
doubt there were numerous mechanical difficulties of cen- 
tring, graduating, &c, to be overcome before it reached per- 
fection. In August 1732, in pursuance of an order from the 
Admiralty, observations were made with Hadley's quadrant 
on board the " Chatham " yacht of 60 tons, below Sheer- 
ness, in rough weather, by persons — except the master attendant 
— unaccustomed to the motion; still the results were very satis- 
factory. A year later Hadley published (Phil. Trans., 1733) the 
description of an instrument for taking altitudes when the 
horizon is not visible. The sketch represents a curved tube or 
spirit-level, attached to the radius of the quadrant, since which 
time many attempts have been unsuccessfully made to construct 
some form of artificial horizon adapted to use at sea on board 
ship, a discovery which would greatly facilitate observations at 
night and at the many times when the natural or sea horizon is 
imperfectly visible. 

From the year 17 14 the history of navigation in England is 
closely associated with that of the " Commissioners for the 
discovery of longitude at sea," a body constituted in that year 
with power to grant annually sums not exceeding £2000 to 
assist experiments and reward minor discoveries, and also to 
judge on applications for much greater rewards which* were 
from time to time offered to open competition. For a method . 
of determining the longitude within 60 geographical miles, to 
be tested by a voyage to the West Indies and back, the sum of 
£10,000 was offered; within 40 m., £15,000; within 30 m., 
£20,000. £ 10,000 was also to be given for a method that would 
determine longitude within 80 m. near the shores of greatest 
danger. No action seems to have been taken before 173 7 ; 
the first grant made was in that year, and the last in 1815, but 
the board continued to exist till 1828, having disbursed in the 
course of its existence £101,000 in all. 2 In the interval a number 
of other acts had been passed either dealing with the powers, 
constitution and funds of the commissioners or encouraging 
nautical discovery; thus the act 18 George II. (1745) offered 
£20,000 for the discovery by a British ship of the North-West 
Passage, and the act 16 George III. (1776) offered the same 
reward for a passage to the Pacific either north-west or north- 
east, and £5000 to any one who should approach by sea within 
one degree of the North Pole. All these acts were swept away 
in 1828, when the longitude problem had ceased to attract 
competitors, and voyages of discovery were nearly over. 

The suggestions and applications sent in to the commissioners were 
naturally very numerous and often very trifling; but they some- 
times furnish useful illustrations of the state of navigation. Thus, 
in a memorial by Captain H. Lanoue (1736), he records a number of 
recent casualties, which shows how carelessly the largest ships were 
then navigated. Several men-of-war off Plymouth in 1691 were 

	2 This total comprises the large sums awarded to Harrison and to 
	the widow of Mayer, the cost of surveys and expeditions in various 
	parts of the globe, large outlays on the Nautical Almanac and on 
	subsidiary calculations and tables, rewards for new methods and 
	solutions of problems, and many minor grants to watchmakers or for 
	improvements in instruments. Thus Jesse Ramsden received in 
	1775 and later about £1600 for his improvements in graduation 
	(q.v.), and E. Massey in 1804 got £200 for his log (see Log). 

wrecked through mistaking the Dead man for Berry Head. Admiral 
Wheeler's squadron in 1694, leaving the Mediterranean, ran on 
Gibraltar when they thought they had passed the Strait. Sir 
Cloudesley Shovel's squadron, in 1707, was lost on the rocks off 
Scilly, by erring in their latitude. Several transports, in 171 1, were 
lost near the river St Lawrence, having erred 15 leagues in the 
reckoning during twenty-four hours. Lord Bel haven was lost on 
the Lizard on the 17th of November 1721, the same day on which he 
sailed from Plymouth. 

Many rewards were paid by the commissioners for methods by 
which the tedious calculations involved in " clearing the lunar 
distance " could be abbreviated; thus Israel Lyons (i739". I 775) 
received £10 for his solution of this problem from the commissioners 
in 1769; and in 1772 he and Richard Dunthorne (1711-1775) 
each obtained £50. George Whichell, master of the Royal Naval 
Academy, Portsmouth, conceived a plan whereby the correction 
could be taken from a table by inspection. In October 1765 the 
commissioners of longitude awarded him £100 to enable him to 
complete and print 1000 copies of his table. On the following 
April they gave him £200 more. The work was continued on the same 
plan by Antony Shepherd, the Plumian professor of astronomy, 
Cambridge, with some additions by the astronomer-royal. The total 
cost of the ponderous 4to volume up to the time of publication in 
June 1772 was £3100, after which £200 more was paid to the Rev. 
Thomas Parkinson and Israel Lyons for examining the errata. It 
was a very large and expensive volume — ill-adapted for ship's use. 
Considerable sums were paid by the commissioners from time to 
time for other tables to facilitate navigation — not always very 
judiciously. It is sufficient to mention here the tables of Michael 
Taylor and those of Mendoza, published in 1815. The proposals 
submitted to the board to find the longitude by the time of the 
moon's meridian passage are very numerous. 4 

One of the first points to which the attention of the com- 
missioners was directed was the survey of the coasts of Great 
Britain, which was pressed on them by Whiston in 1737. He 
was appointed surveyor of coasts and headlands, and in 1741 
received a grant for instruments. An act passed in 1740 
enabled the commissioners to spend money on the survey of 
the coasts of Great Britain and the " plantations." At a later 
date they bore part of the expenses of Cook's scientific voyages, 
and of the publication of their results. Indeed it is to them 
that we owe all that was done by England for surveys of coasts, 
both at home and abroad, prior to the establishment of the 
hydrographk department of the Admiralty in 1795. But their 
chief work lay in the encouragement they gave on the one hand 
to the improvement of timepieces, and on the other to the 
perfecting of astronomical tables and methods, the latter being 
published from time to time in the Nautical Almanac. Before 
we pass on to these two important topics we may with advantage 
take a view of the state of practical navigation in the middle 
of the 1 8th century as shown in two of the principal treatises 
then current. 

John Robertson's Elements of Navigation passed through six 
editions between 1755 and 1796. It contains good teaching on 
arithmetic, geometry; spherical trigonometry, astronomy, geography, 
winds and tides, also a small useful table for correcting the middle 
time between the equal altitudes of the sun-^all good, as is also the 
remark that " the greater the moon's meridian altitude the greater 
generally the tides will be." He states that Lacaille recommends 
equal altitudes being observed and worked separately, in order to 
find the time from noon, and the mean of the results taken as the 
truth. There is a sound article on chronology, the ancient and 
modern modes of reckoning time. A long list of latitudes, longitudes 
and times of high water finishes vol. i. The second volume is said 
by the author to treat of navigation mechanical and theoretical ; by 
the former he means seamanship. He gives instructions for all kinds 
of sailings, for marine surveying and making Mercator's chart. 
There are two good traverse tables, one to quarter points, the other 
to every 15 minutes of arc; the distance to each is 120 m. There is 
a table of meridional parts to minutes, which is more minute than 
customary. Book ix., upon what is now called " the day's work," 
or dead-reckoning, appears to embrace all that is necessary. A great 
many methods, we are told, were then used for measuring a snip's 
rate of sailing, but among the English the log and line with a 
half-minute glass were generally used. Bouguer and Lacaille pro- 
posed a !o£ with a diver to avoid the drift motion (1753 and 1760). 
Robertson s rule of computing the equation of equal altitudes is as 
good as any used at the present day. He gives also a description 
of an equal- altitude instrument, having three horizontal wires, 
probably such as was used at Portsmouth for testing Harrison's 
timekeeper. The mechanical difficulties must have been great in 
preserving a perpendicular stem and a truly horizontal sweep for the 
telescope. It gave place to the improved sextant and artificial 
horizon. The second edition of Robertson's work in 1764 contains an 
excellent dissertation on the rise and progress of modern navigation 
by Dr James Wilson, which has been greatly used by all subsequent 
writers. 

Don Jorge Juan's Compendio de Navegacton, for the use of mid- 
shipmen, was published at Cadiz in 1757. Chapter i. explains what 
pilotage is, practical and theoretical. He speaks of the change of 
variation, " which sailors have not believed and do not believe now." 
He describes the lead, log and sand-glass, the latter corrected by 
a pendulum, charts plane and spherical. Supposing his readers to 
be versed in trigonometry, he explains what latitude and longitude 
are, and shows a method for finding the latter different from what has 
been taught. He explains the error of middle latitude sailing, and 
shows that the longitude found by it is always less than the truth. 
(It is strange that while reckoning was so rough and imperfect in 
many respects such a trifle as that is in low latitudes should be 
noticed.) After speaking of meridional parts, he offers to explain the 
English method, which was discovered by Edmund Halley, but omits 
the principles upon which Hal ley founded his theory, as it was " too 
embarassing." He gives instructions for allowing for currents and 
leeway, tables pi declination, positions of a few stars, meridional 
parts, &c. It is worthyof remark that, after giving a form for a 
log-book, he adds that this had not been previously kept by any one, 
but he thought it should not be trusted to memory. He only re- 
quires the knots, fathoms, course, wind and leeway to be marked 
every two hours. He gives a sketch of Halley's quadrant, but 
without a clamping screw or tangent screw. 

To ascertain local time at sea by astronomical observations 
by the altitude of suitably-situated heavenly bodies was an old, 
well-known and frequently practised operation, so that a 
comparison could thus be easily made between such local time 
and the Greenwich time if known at the same instant. The 
introduction of timekeepers by which Greenwich time can be 
carried to any part of the world, and the longitude found with 
ease, simplicity and certainty is due to the invention of John 
Harrison. 

The idea of keeping time at sea by watches was no novelty, but the 
practical difficulty arose from their very irregular rates owing to 
changes of temperature and the motion of the ship. Huygens had 
applied pendulums to the regulation of clocks on snore in 1656, and 
in 1675 his application of spiral springs as regulators of watches 
made them available for use at sea. William Derham published a 
scientific description of various kinds of timekeepers in The Artificial 
Clock-Maker, in 1700, with a table of equations from Flamsteed to 
facilitate comparison of mean time with that shown by the sun-dial 
or apparent time. In 1714 Henry Sully, an Englishman, published 
a treatise at Vienna, on finding time artificially. He went to France, 
and spent the rest of his life in trying to make a timekeeper for the 
discovery of the longitude at sea. In 1716 he presented a watch of 
his own make to the Academy of Sciences, which was approved; 
and ten years later he went to Bordeaux to try his marine watches, 
but died before embarking. Julien le Roy was his scholar, and 
perfected many of his inventions in watchmaking. 

Harrison's great invention was the principle of compensation 
through the unequal contraction of two metals, which he first applied 
in the invention in 1726 of the compensation (gridiron) pendulum, 
still in use, and then modified so as to fit it to a watch, devising at the 
same time a means by which the watch retains its motion while being 
wound up. With regard to the success of the trial journey (see 
Harrison, John) to Jamaica in 1 761-1762, it may be noted that 
by the journal of the House of Commons we find that the error of 
the watch was ascertained by equal altitudes at Portsmouth and 
Barbados, the calculations being made by Short ; these errors came 
greatly within the limits of the act. At Jamaica the watch was only 
in error five seconds (assuming that the longitude previously found 
by the transit of Mercury could be closely depended on, which as we 
now know, was not the case, the observations being too few in number, 
and taken with an untrustworthy instrument). Short at Portsmouth 
found the whole unallowed-for error from November 6th, 1761, till 
April 2nd, 1762, to be i m 54 , .5 = i8 geographical miles in the latitude 
of Portsmouth. During the passage home in the " Merlin" sloop-of- 
war the timekeeper was placed in the after part of the ship, because 
it was the dryest place, and there it received violent shocks which 
retarded its motion. It lost on the voyage home i m 49* — 16 geo- 
graphical miles. 

One might have supposed that Harrison had now secured the 
Erize; but there were powerful competitors who hoped to gain it 
y lunars, and a bill was passed through the House in 1763 which 
left an open chance for a lunarian during four years. A second West 
Indies trial of the watch took place between November 1763 and 
March 1764, in a voyage to Barbados, which occupied four months; 
during which time it is said, in the preamble to act 5 Geo. III. 1765, 
not to have erred 10 geographical miles in longitude. We only find 
in the public records the equal altitudes taken at Portsmouth and 
at Bridgetown, Barbados. William Harrison assumed an average 
rate of i 1 a-day gaining, and he anticipated that it would go slower 
by I 8 for every 10° increase in temperature. The longitude of 
Bridgetown was determined by N. Maskelyne and C. Green by nine 
emersions of Jupiter's first satellite, against five of Bradley s and 
two at Greenwich Observatory, to be 3 h 54° 20" west of Greenwich. 
In February 1765 the commissioners of longitude expressed an 
opinion that the trial was satisfactory, but required the principles 
to be disclosed and other watches made. t Half the great reward was 
paid to Harrison under act of parliament in this year, and he and his 
son g^ave full descriptions and drawings, upon oath, to seven persons 
appointed by the commissioners of longitude. 1 The other half of the. 
great reward was promised to Harrison when he had made other 
timekeepers to the satisfaction ot the commissioners, and provided 
he gave up everything to them within six months. The second half 
was not paid till 1773, after trials had been made with five watches. 
These trials were partly made at Greenwich by Maskelyne, who, as 
we shall see, was a great advocate of lunars, and was not ready to 
admit more than a subsidiary value to the watch. A bitter contro- 
versy arose, and Harrison in 1767 published a book in which he 
charges Maskelyne with exposing his watch to unfair treatment. 
The feud between the astronoiner-royal and the watchmakers con- 
tinued long after this date. 

Even after Harrison had received his £20,000, doubts were felt 
as to the certainty of his achievement, and fresh rewards weie 
offered in 1774 both for timekeepers and for improved lunar tables 
or other methods. But the tests proposed for timekeepers were very 
discouraging, and the watchmakers complained that this was due to 
Maskelyne. A fierce attack on the astronomer's treatment of himself 
and other watchmakers was made by Thomas Mudge in 1792, in 
A Narrative of Facts, addressed to the first lord of the Admiralty, 
and^ Maskelyne's reply does not convey the conviction that full 
justice was done to timekeepers. Maskelyne at this date still says 
that he would prefer an occultation of a bright star by the moon and 
a number of correspondent observations of transits of the moon 
compared with those of fixed stars, made by two astronomers at 
remote places, to any timekeeper. The details of these controversies, 
and of subsequent improvements in timekeepers, need not detain us 
here. In England the names of John Arnold and Thomas Earnshaw 
as watchmakers are prominent, each of whom received, up to 1805, 
£3000 reward from the commissioners of longitude. It was Arnold 
who introduced the name chronometer. The French emulated the 
English efforts for the production of good timekeepers, and favour- 
able trials were made between 1768 and 1772 with watches by Le 
Roy and F. Berthoud. 

The marvellous accuracy with which the modern chronometer 
is constructed is doubtless greatly stimulated by the annual 
competition at Greenwich, from which the Admiralty purchase 
for the British navy. These chronometers are all fitted with 
secondary compensation balances, and it is therefore unusual 
in the navy to apply any temperature correction to the rate. 
The perfection obtainable in compensation may be illustrated 
by the performance of a chronometer at the Royal Observatory 
in 1S86, which at a mean temperature of 50° F. had a weekly 
rate of i-6 sees, losing; and on being further tested at a mean 
temperature of 02 F., it only changed its weekly rate to 2-9 sees, 
losing. In the mercantile marine cheaper chronometers without 
secondary compensation are more commonly used, and tempera- 
ture corrections applied, calculated from a formula originally 
proposed by Hartnup, formerly of the Liverpool Observatory. 
Great success attends this mode of procedure, as illustrated by 
the following facts. From the discussion of the records of per- 
formance of the chronometers of the Pacific Steam Navigation 
Company during twenty-six voyages from London to Valparaiso 
and back, by giving equal weight to each of the three chrono- 
meters carried by each ship, the mean error of longitude for an 
average voyage of 101 days was less than three minutes of arc. 
As a single instance, in the s.s. Orellana> on applying temperature 
rates during a voyage of 6$ days, the mean accumulated error 
of the three chronometers was only 2-3 sec. of time. 

While chronometers were thus rapidly approaching their 
present perfection the steady progress of astronomy both by the 
multiplication and increased accuracy of observations, and 
by corresponding advances in the theory, had made it possible 
to construct greatly improved tables. In observations of the 
moon Greenwich still took the lead; and it was here that Hailey's 
successor Bradley made his two grand discoveries of aberration 
and nutation which have added so much to the precision of 
modern astronomy. Kepler's Rudolphine tables of 1627 and 
Street's tables of j66j, which had held their ground for almost 

	x The explanations and drawings are at the British Museum; 
	and two of his watches, one of which was used by Captain Cook in the 
	" Resolution," are at Greenwich Observatory. In 1767 Harrison 
	estimates that a watch could be made for £100, and ultimately for 
	£70 or £80. 

a century, were rendered obsolete by the observations of Halley 
and his successor. At length, in 1753, in the second volume of 
the Commentarii of the Academy of Gottingen, Tobias Mayer 
printed his new solar and lunar tables, which were to have so 
great an influence on the history of navigation. Mayer after- 
wards constructed and submitted to the English government in 
1755 improved MS. tables. Bradley found that the moon's 
place by these tables was generally correct within 1', so that the 
error in a longitude found by lunar would not be much more than 
half a degree if the necessary observations could be taken 
accurately at sea. Thus the lunar problem seemed to have at 
length become a practical one for mariners, and in England it 
was taken up with great energy by Nevil Maskelyne — " the 
father," as he has been called, " of lunar observations." 

In 1761 Maskelyne was sent to St Helena to observe the 
transit of Venus. On his voyage out and home he used Mayer's 
printed tables for lunar determinations of the longitude, and 
from St Helena he wrote a letter to the Royal Society {Phil. 
Trans. t 1762), in which he described his observations made with 
Hadley's quadrant of 20 in. radius, constructed by John Bird, 
and the glasses ground by Dollond. He took the observations 
both ways to avoid errors. The arc and index were of brass, 
the frame mahogany; the vernier was subdivided to minutes. 
The telescope was 6 in. long, magnified four times, and inverted. 
Very few seamen in that day possessed so good an instrument. 
He considered that ship's time should be ascertained within 
twelve hours before or after observing the lunar distance, as a 
good common watch will scarcely vary above a minute in that 
time. This shows that he must have intended the altitudes to 
be calculated — which would lead to new errors. He considered 
that his observations would give the longitude within i\ degrees. 
On the nth of February he took ten observations; the extremes 
were a little over one degree apart. 

On his return to England Maskelyne prepared the British 
Mariner's Guide (1763), in which he undertakes to furnish 
complete and easy instructions for finding the longitude at sea 
or on shore,within a degree, by observing the distance between 
the moon and sun, or a star, by Hadley's quadrant. How far that 
promise was fulfilled, and the practicability of the instructions, 
are points worth consideration, as the book took a prominent 
place for some years. The errors which he said were inseparable 
from the dead-reckoning " even in the hands of the ablest and 
most skilful navigators," amounting at times to 15 degrees, 
appear to be overestimated. On the other hand, the equations 
to determine the moon's position at time of observation from 
Mayer's tables, would, he believed, always determine the longi- 
tude within a degree, and generally to half a degree, if applied 
to careful observations. He recommends the two altitudes and 
distance being taken simultaneously when practicable. The 
probable error of observation in a meridian altitude he estimated 
at one or two minutes, and in a lunar distance at two minutes. 
He then gave clear rules for finding the moon's position and 
distance by ten equations, too laborious for seamen to undertake. 
Admitting the requisite calculations for finding the moon's 
place to be difficult, he desired to see the moon's longitude 
and latitude computed for every twelve hours, and hence 
her distance from the sun and from a proper star on each side of 
her carefully calculated for every six hours, and published 
beforehand. 

In 1765 Maskelyne became astronomer-royal, and was able 
to give effect to his own suggestion by organizing the publication 
of the Nautical Almanac. The same act of 1765 which gave 
Harrison his first £10,000 gave the commissioners authority 
and funds for this undertaking. Mayer's tables, with his MS. 
improvements up to his death in 1762, were bought from his 
widow for £3000; £300 was granted to the mathematician L. 
Euler, on whose theory of the moon Mayer's later tables were 
formed; and the first Nautical Almanac, that for 1767, was 
published in the previous year, at the cost and under the authority 
of the commissioners of longitude. In 1696 the French nautical 
almanac for the following year appeared, an improvement on 
what had been before issued by private persons, but it did not 
attempt to give lunar distances. 1 In the English Nautical 
Almanac for 1767 we find everything necessary to render it 
worthy of confidence, and to satisfy every requirement at sea. 
The great achievement was that of giving the distance from the 
moon's centre to the sun, when suitable, and to about seven fixed 
stars, every three hours. The mariner has only to find the 
apparent time at ship, and clear his own measured lunar distance 
from the effects of parallax and refraction (for which at the end 
of the book are given the methods of Lyons and Dunthorne), 
and then by simple proportions, or proportional logarithms, find 
the time at Greenwich. The calculations respecting the sun and 
moon were made from Mayer's last manuscript tables under the 
inspection of Maskelyne, and were so continued till 1804. 2 The 
calculations respecting the planets are from Halley's tables, 
and those of Jupiter's satellites from tables made by Wargentin 
and published by Lalande in 1759 (except those for the fourth 
satellite). The original Nautical Almanac contained all the 
principal points of information which the seaman required, but 
the great value of such an authentic publication to the whole 
astronomical world led soon to a considerable increase to its 
contents. As much of this was unnecessary for the ordinary 
requirements of navigation, since 1903 it has been issued in two 
forms, the larger for observatory purposes, the smaller for the 
class for whom it was originally intended. 

Various useful rules and tables were appended to early volumes 
of the Almanac. Thus that for 1771 contains a method and table for 
determining the latitude by two altitudes and the elapsed time (first 
published by Cornelius Downes of Amsterdam in 1740). At the 
end of the Almanac for 1772 Maskelyne and Whichell gave three 
special tables for clearing the lunar distance; still their rule is 
neither short nor easily remembered. An improvement of Dun- 
thorne's solution is also jpven. In the edition lor 1773 a new table 
for equations of equal altitude was given by W. Wales. In those for 
1797 and 1800 tables were added by John Brinkley for rendering 
the calculations for double altitudes easier. 

The plan of the Nautical Almanac was soon^ imitated by other 
nations. In France the Acade*mie Royale de Marine had all the lunar 
distances translated from the British Nautical Almanac for 1773 and 
following years, retaining Greenwich time for the three-hourly 
distances. The tables were considered excellent, and national pride 
was satisfied by their having been formed on the plan proposed 
by Lacaille. They did not imitate the mode given for clearing the 
lunar distance, considering their own better. 

Though the Spaniards were leaders in the art of navigation during 
the 16th and 17th centuries, it was not till November 4, 1791, that 
their first nautical almanac was printed at Madrid, having been 
previously calculated at Cadiz for the year 1792. They acknowledge 
borrowing from the English and French. The excellent Berlin 
Astronomisches Jahrbuch began to appear in 1776, the American 
Ephemeris in 1849. These two ephemerides and the French Con- 
naissance des temps are independent and valuable works. 

A book of Tables Requisite to be Used with the Nautical Ephemeris 
was published by Maskelyne at the same time as the first Almanac. 
and ten thousand copies were quickly sold. A second edition, pre- 
pared by Wales, appeared in 1781, an octavo of 237 pages, in the 
preface of which it is stated that it contains everything necessary for 
computing the latitude and longitude by observation. There are in 
all twenty-three tables, the traverse tableland table of meridional 
parts alone being deficient as compared with modern works of the 
kind; dead-reckoning Maskelyne did not touch. He gave practical 
methods for working several problems; that for computing the lunar 

	1 The French nautical almanac or Connaissance des temps ap- 
	peared under letters patent from the king, dated 24th March 1670, — 
	seventeen years before the first issue. The following is a literal trans- 
	lation of its advertisement : " This little book is a collection of holy 
	days and festivals in each month. The rising and setting of the 
	moon when it is visible, and of the sun every day. The aspects of the 
	planets as with respect to each other, the moon and the fixed stars. 
	Thelunations and eclipses. The difference of longitude between the 
	meridian of Paris and the principal towns in France. The time of 
	the sun's entrance into the twelve signs of the zodiac. The true place 
	of the planets every fifth day, and of the moon every day of the year, 
	in longitude and latitude. The moon's meridian passage, for finding 
	the time of high water, ' as well as for the use of dials by moonlight? 
	A table of refraction. The equation of time [this table is strangely 
	arranged, as though the clock were to be reset on the first of every 
	month, and the explanation speaks of the ' premier mobile ']. The 
	time of twilight at Paris. The sun's right ascension to hours and 
	minutes. The sun's declination at noon each day to seconds. The 
	whole accompanied by necessary instructions." 

	Mayer's tables were printed at London under Maskelyne's 
	superintendence in 1770. 

especially is an improvement on those by Lyons and Dunthorne, and 
a rule given for clearing the distance, called Dunthorne's improved 
method, is remarkably short. Maskelyne's rule for finding the 
latitudes by two altitudes and the elapsed time is also good. The 
third edition of the Tables was issued in 1802. 

The publication of the Requisite Tables met a great want, and the 
existence of such accurate and conveniently-arranged mathematical 
tables for the special purposes of nautical calculations led to the more 
general use of many refinements which had been previously neglected. 
They formed the original of many subsequent and greatly extended 
collections, of which those by J.\V. Norie are the more generally used 
in modern times in the mercantile marine, and the very accurate and 
comprehensive tables by James I nman (originally published in 1823) 
are constantly used in the British navy. 

Until the middle of the 17th century mariners generally employed 
small collections of Dutch charts, known as waggoners from 
Waghenair, the name of a celebrated Dutch hydrographer in 1584. 
In 1671 appeared the English Pilot by John Sellers, who is styled the 
" Hydrographer Royal." It forms a collection of rude sketches of 
the coasts of England, the North Sea, France and Spain, with safling 
directions, and on its appearance the importation of Dutch charts 
was prohibited. Private enterprise, for many years after that, 
supplied both the British navy and the British mercantile marine 
with constantly improving charts, especially latterly, under the 
powerful patronage of the East India Company, whose hydrographer 
(Alexander Dairy mple), in 1795, was selected as the first hydro- 
grapher of the Admiralty. This post has since been occupied by a 
succession of distinguished naval officers under whom have grown 
up a large school of able nautical surveyors, the results of whose 
labours are now published in the well-known Admiralty charts. 

Prior to the issue of charts by the Admiralty, the instructions to 
masters of vessels in the British navy enjoined them to " provide such 
charts and instruments as they considered necessary for the safe 
navigation of the ship," while on the completion of a voyage of 
discovery it was customary for the results to be published for the 
Admiralty by private firms. 

The establishment of the Admiralty Hydrographic Office in 
1 79S marked a great step in the advancement of the art of naviga- 
tion. On the 1 2th of August of that year an order in council 
placed all such nautical documents as were^tben in the possession 
of the Admiralty in charge of Dalrymple, whose catalogue, 
compiled for the use of the East India Company in 1786, contained 
347 charts between England, the Cape, India and China; thus 
the germ of the present hydrographic department was estab- 
lished. The expense was then limited to £650 a year. The first 
official catalogue of Admiralty charts was issued in 1830, the 
total number being then 962. 

After the close of the long devastating war in 181 5 both trade 
and science revived, and several governments besides that of 
Great Britain saw the necessity of surveying the coasts in various 
parts of the globe; the greater portion of the work fell to the 
English hydrographical department, which took under its charge 
nearly every place where the inhabitants were not able to do it 
for themselves. Since that time its career of usefulness has 
steadily developed, and it not merely undertakes the constant 
improvement of the charts of the whole world, but periodically 
issues for the use of the seafaring community a vast amount of 
most accurate and practical nautical information on the various 
closely allied subjects of navigation, tides, compass adjustment 
and ocean meteorology. 

A knowledge of the times and heights of high and low water and 
the directions of the tidal streams due to those phenomena are in 
many^ parts of the world (and especially round our own coasts) of 
vital importance to navigation. The theory of the tides was first 
laid down by Newton and Laplace, and in Phil. Trans. , 1683, there 
is an account of Flamsteed's tide table for London Bridge, which 
gave the times of each high tide on every day in the year. For a 
long subsequent period empirical tide tables for a few places in 
England were published by private individuals, but in 1832 the 
researches of Dr W. Whewell and Sir J. W. Lubbock enabled official 
tide tables to be issued by the Admiralty. These have steadily 
advanced in detail and accuracy, being now in many cases based on 
continuous tidal observations for a whole lunar period of 18} years, 
and represent the practical epitome of our knowledge of the tides 
and tidal currents of the whole world. The formulae and tables on 
which these predictions are based are given in the introduction to 
each annual volume (see TinE). 

Modern Navigation' 

Having thus sketched the progress of the art of navigation 
from an early period to the present time, we will now describe 
the modern methods by which it is brought into practical use, 
referring our readers for more technical information to \he 
professional text-books enumerated at the end of this article. 
The great development in both size and speed of modern ships 
enormously increases the responsibilities of those who command 
and navigate them, and has led to a careful examination of 
the existing modes of determining a ship's position at all times 
by day or night, both when in sight of land and on the open ocean. 
An examination of the present text-books on the subject of 
navigation shows how problems and methods which were formerly 
considered chiefly as theoretical exercises have now, from the 
altered conditions of the navigation of very fast ships, become 
methods of frequent practice, while corresponding improvements 
have been made in the instruments, such as compasses, charts 
and chronometers, by the aid of which more satisfactory results 
are now attained. Much has also been done to advance the 
study of this and its numerous allied subjects by the development 
of the Royal Naval College at Greenwich and the United Seivice 
Institution; also by the establishment of shipmasters' societies 
(of which the well-known society in London is typical), where 
during the year valuable papers are read and useful discussions 
take place among those actually carrying out the practice of 
navigation. 

In planning out in advance a long ocean voyage the experienced 
navigator would first, by laying down the track from port to 
port on a great circle chart, ascertain the shortest route between 
them, remembering that the greatest saving in distance over 
other routes is when the ports are far apart in longitude and 
both in high latitudes of the same name. On examining such 
a track in conjunction with the wind and current charts it will 
be seen what modifications the intervention of land, unfavourable 
currents or winds, ice or unduly high latitude render necessary, 
and such modified route would be finally adopted subject to 
possible change as the voyage progressed. The judgment 
formed on the best route to follow would also be largely influenced 
by the remarks in the volumes of Sailing directions or " Pilots " 
relating to the region about to be traversed,while among the 
many excellent modern publications of the Hydrographic 
Office of the Admiralty perhaps the Ocean Passage Book is one 
of the most generally useful, since, when used in combination 
with the admirable charts of suggested full-powered and auxiliary 
tracks, it very greatly assists all navigators in planning out 
a successful voyage. Finally the intended route would be trans- 
ferred from the great circle chart to one on Mercator's projection, 
which is the more convenient for purposes of navigation since 
in constructing the former for the sake of simplicity a projection 
of the coast's surface is adopted on which great circles are 
correctly shown as straight lines (gnomonic), while for practical 
purposes in navigation such a representation on which a ship's 
track when steering a continuous course (technically termed a 
rhumb line) is truly shown as a straight line (Mercator) is the 
most convenient, although in high latitudes giving a very 
distorted representation of the surface depicted. It is well to 
remember that on great circle charts rhumb lines become curves 
and great circles straight lines, and, vice versa, on Mercator 
charts, the rhumb line on each projection being that nearer 
to the equator, all meridians and the equator on both projections 
are shown as straight lines. 

Ships rarely steer on great circles, which would generally 
theoretically involve continually altering course, but a scries 
of chords of such circles are described of lengths such as involve 
a practical change of course of one or two degrees on the com- 
pletion of each. 

Great circle charts are very useful for drawing what is known 
as a composite track where if the great circle route would lead 
into too high a latitude the shortest route to and from the highest 
desirable parallel is readily laid down, the intervening track 
being pursued on that parallel. 

A method of drawing approximate great circles directly 
on Mercator charts was proposed by Airy in 1858, and is some- 
times very useful. The excellent idea, originally suggested 
by M. F. Maury, of establishing steam " lanes " in localities 
where there is much ocean traffic, so as to minimize the risks of 
collision between outward and homeward bound ships, has been 
successfully carried out in the North Atlantic. The leading 
transatlantic steamship companies now agree to follow great 
circle routes from the Irish coast to points on the Banks of 
Newfoundland, which vary somewhat in position with the 
season of the year, but are published in advance. These " lanes " 
being avoided by sailing vessels, risks of collision are materially 
lessened. 

Having thus planned the most desirable general track to 
pursue, three methods are employed to ascertain the position 
of the ship at. any time during such voyage: these are (1) pro- 
jecting the track on charts; (2) simple trigonometrical calcula- 
tions where the data are the course steered and distance run; 
and (3) astronomical observations, which form an entirely 
independent method. 

Of these the first is the least trustworthy, owing to the usual 
difficulties attending accurate graphic methods and the small 
scales on which ocean charts are necessarily drawn. When 
near the land the larger scale coast charts are used, and in the 
approaches to harbours still larger scale plans give increasing 
accuracy to this record of a ship's position. Index charts of 
all parts of the world are provided, by referring to which the 
navigator ascertains which chart or plan to employ, always 
preferably using that on the largest scale. 

On leaving harbour, and while near the coast, the position 
is not found by calculation but by frequently observing (when 
a variety of objects is in sight) (1) simultaneous sextant angles 
between suitably situated objects subsequently laid down on 
the chart by a station pointer; (2) simultaneous compass 
bearings of two or more objects (technically known as cross 
bearings) ; or (3) a combination of both methods by employing 
one bearing and one angle. All such methods are capable of 
considerable accuracy if the observations are made simultane- 
ously. Should only a small number of objects, or sometimes 
only one, be visible (as frequently occurs at night) other and 
rougher methods are practised, depending upon the change 
of bearing of an object while a certain distance in a certain 
direction is traversed by the ship, such knowledge being based 
in many cases on an estimate of the action of the tide. When 
a ship is steaming at the rate of 20 knots the navigator remembers 
that a mile is passed over in three minutes, and that if in sight 
of land and fixing positions by objects on shore, it is essential to 
adopt some rapid method; otherwise when laid down on the 
chart the position shows where the ship was, and not where 
she is. This difficulty has led to the more general use of methods 
of obtaining positions by angles instead of bearings, and laying 
thein down on the chart by the aid of the station pointer. Many 
advantages accrue from this, as the observer is not restricted 
in position on board, as is the case when using the compass, 
and especially if a double sextant (having two index glasses 
and one horizon glass) is employed two angles can be measured 
simultaneously, the result on the chart being very rapidly 
arrived at. An ingenious combination of sextant and station 
pointer in one has been proposed, and most simply carried out 
by attaching vertical sights to the legs of a station pointer, 
which is put on a suitable horizontal stand, and the legs moved 
until the sights are in line with the objects observed. To assist 
the navigator in the choice of suitable objects between which 
to measure the angles, a very useful pamphlet is issued by the 
Admiralty, from the diagrams in which* it can be seen at a glano 
which combination of objects in sight gives the most favourable 
result, always remembering as a broad principle that nearei 
objects are more suitable than distant ones, and that the accurac; 
of position determined depends on the relative distances of tin 
objects as well as on the magnitude of the angles between them 

In these circumstances, which render these rougher methods 
those only available, and especially in hazy weather in many 
known localities (such as the English Channel), a continuous 
line of deep sea soundings at fairly even distances apart affords 
an additional verification of position, remembering that only 
an occasional sounding might prove very misleading. 

The chronicle of progress in the art of navigation would be very 
incomplete without reference to the extended use of Lord 
Kelvin's sounding machines, either in the original form, where 
the increased pressure at different depths is recorded by dis- 
coloration of chemical tubes, or in the later form known as the 
" depth recorder," where similar results are obtained hy the 
automatic record of the position of a piston forced upwards 
in a tube by this increased pressure. Very satisfactory results 
can be obtained at speeds of 15 or 16 knots, enabling that great 
safeguard of navigation in many places, viz. a continuous line 
of soundings, to be accurately and rapidly obtained. In con- 
nexion with this should be mentioned a most ingenious invention 
known as the " suhmarine sentry," which on being set for any 
desired depth and towed overboard remains at that depth what- 
ever the speed of the ship may be. On striking bottom it at once 
floats to the surface and rings a warning hell. Such an instru- 
ment is of obvious value in ships where, owing to the small 
number of available men, it is difficult to maintain a continuous 
line of soundings. To avoid an unnecessarily wide detour in 
rounding points and shoals, extensive use is now made of both 
horizontal and vertical danger angles ; the former is the angle 
on the arc of a horizontal circle passing through a point at the 
required distance from the danger, and through two previously 
selected, easily recognized, fixed objects. Should circumstances 
enable the selection to be made of an angle of about oo°, the 
ship hy continually measuring the angle may he steered on the 
arc of such a circle with great precision, and may even be safely 
taken through a channel between two dangers. The vertical 
danger angle enahles similar results to be attained by measuring 
the vertical angle subtended by a known height; but except 
where the selected object is one whose height is well determined, 
such as a lighthouse, this method is not so trustworthy as the 
former. 

Before losing sight of land the latitude and longitude of the last 
well-determined position found by the methods referred to is 
taken from the coast chart, transferred to the ocean or small scale 
chart, and considered to be the " departure " or starting-point of 
the ocean voyage, and from that point the course and distance 
run by the ship is laid down, heing rectified on every occasion 
when the position is more accurately determined by astronomical 
means. To obviate the inevitable inaccuracies attending this 
graphic method and as a corroboration of the ship's position, 
the changes of latitude and longitude involved in each alteration 
of course are daily calculated by plane trigonometry, such 
calculations being materially abbreviated by the use of the 
Traverse Table, which is a tabulated expression of the solutions 
of right-angled plane triangles. 

The foregoing modes of keeping account of a ship's position are 
technically known as " dead reckoning." The general introduc- 
tion of compasses with short needles and slow periods of vibration 
has done very much towards improving the accuracy with which 
a ship's " dead reckoning " is kept. The original model of these 
was that patented by Lord Kelvin in 1876, and since adopted in 
the British navy as the standard. In this instrument we have 
a compass specially designed to enahle the principles of com- 
pensation or correction proposed by Sir G. B. Airy in 1837 to 
be accurately carried out, while its slow period of swing renders, 
it in all circumstances extremely steady. 

The record of distance run is always obtained from the patent 
log, usually in the form of the Cherub or Taffrail log introduced 
in 1878. The common or hand log has ceased to be regarded as 
anything but the very roughest of guides, and the patent log 
in its original form, in which it recorded the revolutions of a small 
screw towed by the ship, docs not give satisfactory results at 
great speeds, nor can anything more favourable be said of those 
forms where pressure on known areas is employed. The revolu- 
tions of the engines, with due allowance made for the condition 
of the ship's hottom, afford now perhaps the best means of 
estimating speed (see Log). 

Astronomical observations afford the most accurate means 
of ascertaining positions at sea, other methods (dead reckoning) 
being only relied upon when the weather does not admit of the 
practice of these, though hy utilizing twilight and night observa- 
tions of moon, stars and planets, the navigator in most parts 
of the world need seldom proceed far without the means of 
astronomically rectifying his position either in latitude, longitude 
or both at the same time. 

The practical problems involved are precisely those employed 
at astronomical observatories, but it is not possible to attain 
similar accuracy of results, for though the sextant (the instru- 
ment always employed at sea in making such observations) 
is capable of marvellous accuracy, yet, as practically all such 
observations depend directly upon altitudes measured ahove 
the sea horizon, the uncertainty and variability of the true 
position of this, due to the changing effects of refraction, much 
affect observations made at any one time. This error in practice 
is greatly reduced by methods of combining several observations 
made at different times and using their mean or average result. 

A notahle feature of the progress of the art of modern navigation 
is the greatly increased practice of star navigation, and many of 
the supposed difficulties of night observations are found to be 
removed by experience. Determinations of positions at sea by 
twilight observations, when the brighter stars become visihle 
while the horizon is still well defined, are probably the most 
accurate means we possess; and the careful navigator, by 
combining for latitude stars passing north and south of the zenith, 
and for longitude those near the prime vertical hoth east and west, 
can generally depend upon a good result, especially if suitable 
stars can be found for each pair at about the same altitudes. 
For these purposes the armillary sphere is extremely useful: 
this is a small celestial globe on which are depicted the principal 
stars visible to the naked eye. On elevating the pole to the 
approximate latitude of the observer, and turning the sphere 
until the sidereal time is under the fixed meridian, a correct 
representation of the heavens at the time of observation is 
ohtained; the stars a^e then easily identified by their bearings 
and altitudes. This valuahle instrument is not merely useful 
when at twilight, only a few of the brighter stars being visible, the 
constellations to which they belong are" difficult of recognition, 
but it enables arrangement to he made in advance for such 
observations as are desired to he taken during the night. By 
marking in pencil on the globe the positions of the planets in 
right ascension and declination, the same sphere is also available 
for their identification. The heavenly bodies commonly observed 
at sea are: The Sun, Moon, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the 
Pole star, and the larger (or first magnitude) fixed stars, the 
positions of all of which in the heavens are given in the Nautical 
Almanac for fixed epochs at Greenwich, with the requisite data 
for computing their positions at all other times in all other places. 

The chief astronomical observations made at sea are those for 
ascertaining (1) latitude, (2) time and thence longitude, (3) error of 
compass, and (4) latitude and longitude simultaneously. 

To ascertain latitude by itself altitudes of heavenly bodies are 
measured above the horizon when they are on or near the meridian 
and therefore exactly or nearly north or south of the observer; in 
the case of the sun, of course, this means at or near noon, and in the 
case of other bodies such local times are previously accurately 
ascertained by a simple calculation made from the Nautical Almanac 
or more roughly found from an armillary sphere. The principle 
involved is the simple one that by subtracting the observed altitude 
when on the meridian from 90° the distance of the zenith or point 
overhead north or south of the heavenly body is found; then by 
combining with this the distance, obtained from the Nautical 
Almanac , of the body considered north or south of the celestial 
equator at the same instant, it is found how far the zenith is north 
or south of the celestial equator, and this js exactly the same as rhe 
latitude of the observer since the celestial equator is merely the 
imaginary extension of that of the earth. Such observations are not 
necessarily restricted to that which can be taken at the instant when 
the body observed is on the meridian (meridian altitude); equally 
accurate and multiplied observations can be made on either or both 
sides of the meridian if the body is somewhat near it (ex-meridian 
and circum-meridian altitudes), and a simple calculation or reference 
to a specially constructed table or graphic curve gives the required 
result. 

Errors arising from uncertainty as to the true position of the 
horizon are with twilight and night observations largely counter- 
acted by taking the means of results obtained from observations 
made of heavenly bodies crossing the meridian both north and 
south of the observer, taken as nearly at the same time as convenient. 
In northern latitudes the pole star is so near to the pole that 
observations of it can be taken at any time when it is visible, and 
from a convenient table given in the Nautical Almanac the altitude 
of the pole itself (which equals the latitude) is readily obtained. 

Longitude at sea is in modern navigation always found by com- 
paring local or ship mean time with Greenwich mean time, the latter 
being accurately known from the chronometers and the former from 
astronomical observations of suitably placed heavenly bodies. It 
may be assumed in all well found modern ships that on applying the 
known errors and accumulated rates to the times shown by the 
chronometers the Greenwich time at any instant is practically 
accurately known, and as the distance east or west of any place is 
merely the difference between the two local times at any instant ex- 
pressed in degrees, so also is the distance east or west of Greenwich 
(longitude) the difference between time at place and Greenwich time 
at any one instant. The connexion between time and degrees depends 
upon the complete rotation of the earth in twenty-four hours, causing 
meridians 15 apart to pass under the same fixed point in the heavens 
at intervals of one hour, those east of Greenwich passing earlier and 
those west later, resulting in local time being in advance of Greenwich 
time in cast longitude and vice versa in west longitude. 

The errors and rates of gaining or losing of the chronometer re- 
ferred to are known from observations made on shore prior to the 
beginning of the voyage with a sextant and artificial horizon, and 
these observations are capable of almost as great accuracy as those 
taken at fixed astronomical observatories. As this knowledge is 
absolutely essential every opportunity is taken at each principal port 
visited of either repeating such observations or obtaining the infor- 
mation from time balls dropped from observatories on shore at the 
Greenwich times indicated in the Time-ball pamphlet. Local or ship 
time can only be found with fair accuracy from calculations based on 
altitudes of heavenly bodies, when they are nearly east or west of the 
observer or technically on the prime vertical. Such times can be 
approximately seen from the azimuth diagrams or from tables of true 
bearings of heavenly bodies, and the error involved by uncertainty 
as to the position of the horizon can be greatly obviated in twilight or 
at night by taking the mean of results arising from nearly simultane- 
ous observations of bodies bearing both east and west. In the usual 
case of determining time by observations of the sun the results arising 
from morning observations are compared with those similarly ob- 
tained in the afternoon. It will of course be remarked that should 
any unallowed-for error in the chronometer exist it will affect the 
resulting longitude by its full amount. 

In considering the foregoing methods of astronomically fixing a 
ship's position we notice that always when the two elements of 
latitude and longitude are determined at different times, and gener- 
ally, as we shall presently see, when they are determined together 
(though usually for a shorter time) the navigator has to depend for 
some time on the accuracy of the course steered and estimated 
distance run; also when cloudy weather prevails he has to depend 
entirely on those elements for a knowledge of the ship's position. 
The frequent astronomical observation of the error of the compass is 
therefore a most important and fortunately simple duty. In practice 
the error is found by a comparison between the compass bearing of a 
heavenly body and its true bearing, obtained either by calculation, or 
more generally from a graphic diagram (Weir's azimuth diagram) or 
tables from which at practically any time when above the horizon the 
true bearings of the principal heavenly bodies are taken by in- 
spection. These important observations are most accurately made 
when the body observed is bearing nearly east or west true, if not 
too high, but if clouds prevent observations at such times, fairly good 
results can be obtained by observing the compass bearing when the 
object is on the meridian (if not too high) and therefore lying north 
or south true. 

The causes of the changing errors of a compass in an iron ship 
are described elsewhere (see Compass), but by making comparisons 
as above the navigator can at once ascertain what is termed the 
" total " error, and if he takes from that the portion of error due to 
the earth, or what is termed variation (known from a chart of such 
elements), the remaining error is that caused by the iron of- the ship, 
technically known as deviation. The latter method of procedure has 
the great advantage of enabling the navigator to ascertain during a 
voyage whatever magnetic changes in the ship are taking place other 
than those he would expect to occur on change of position. The 
total error is that applied to compass courses. 

Deviations greater than a few degrees are not merely inconvenient 
but in modern compasses produce unsteadiness or oscillation of the 
compass card, so that, especially in uew ships, the skilful navigator 
reduces such errors by adjusting the compensating magnets when 
favourable occasions offer. Recognizing the great value of a sound 
knowledge of compass adjustment, the British Board of Trade have 
included this among the compulsory subjects of examination for the 
rank of master, thus following the example of the navy, where all 
navigating officers have to attend a practical course of study on the 
subject. 

The practical problem of finding both latitude and longitude at the 
same time is the most important of all in modern navigation, and is 
rapidly superseding other modes of ascertaining a ship's position. 
The principle involved depends upon the fact that every heavenly 
body is at each particular instant of time directly overhead or in the 
zenith of some place on the earth. Thus, if we take the sun as an 
instance, it is noon at all places on the meridian of 60 ° W. when it is 
exactly 4 p.m. at Greenwich, and at the one spot on that meridian 
where the observer is as far north or south of the terrestrial equator 
as the sun is north or south of the celestial equator (declination) it will 
not only be noon but the sun will be immediately overhead and will 
have an altitude of 90 °. This, therefore, at any instant defines the 
position where the sun is vertical; its latitude must equal the sun's 
declination and its longitude in time equal the time since noon at 
Greenwich. Now at a distance of 60 m. in every direction on the 
surface of the earth from the point thus defined the sun will have an 
altitude of Sg° and in all directions at a distance of 1200 m. its 
altitude will be 70 ( = 90°— 20 ), so that on a globe, by marking the 
position where at a certain instant the sun is vertical and taking 
that as a centre, a series of concentric circles may be drawn, on all 
points of each of which the sun's altitude will be the same. When, 
therefore, at sea we measure with a sextant at any time the altitude 
of the sun (say 6o° io'J we at once know we are somewhere on the arc 
of a circle having for its centre the spot where the sun is vertical at 
that instant, and for radius a distance equal to 1790' ( = 90°— 6o° 10'). 
Such information, combined with the best and most recent knowledge 
we have of the ship's latitude at the time, will of itself afford valuable 
information as to the position, but by making two such observations, 
separated by a sufficiently long interval for the position having the 
sun vertical to have moved considerably (owing to the rotation of 
the earth), we are able to consider with certainty that we must be at 
one or other of the widely separated intersections of two such 
circles, the movement of the ship in the interval between the two 
observations being duly allowed for. The dead reckoning affords 
information as to which of these intersections is the true position. 

Now even on a large globe it would be practically impossible to 
obtain very accurate results from this problem by drawing such 
circles, but on a large scale chart (or ordinary squared paper) much 
greater accuracy is obtainable. The method commonly used on a 
Mercator chart involves two suppositions: (1) that the concentric 
circles we have referred to will be correctly represented as circles on 
the chart, and (2) that these are of such diameters, that a portion of 
say 100 m. of arc may be considered to be a straight line coincident 
with the tangent to the circle and therefore at right angles to the 
direction of the sun. Except in high latitudes (above 60 °) Mercator's 
projection fulfils the first condition sufficiently well for practical 
purposes, and, except when the altitude is greater than 70 °, the 
second condition is also approximately true since the radii of such 
circles will exceed 1200 m. 

Premising these conditions, suppose that on a certain day at 9 a.m. 
when the ship's approximate position, known from previous observa- 
tions and laid down on the ♦ 
chart, is supposed to be at A 
(fig. y), an observation of the 
sun is made from which the 
longitude is calculated, the 
result being that on the sup- 
position that the latitude of 
A is correct, the ship's position 
is probably at B. Now by 
drawing a straight line ab 
through B at rignt angles to 
the true bearing of the sun 
at the time of observation 
(which is most readily known 
from the azimuth tables) we , p 
are obviously right in assum- a' * ' 
ing the ship's position tc be somewhere on that line if we consider 
it as approximately an arc of a large circle having the place where 
the sun is then vertical as a centre, the direction of such place being 
indicated by an arrow. 

If our supposed latitude be right the position will be at B, but if 
not correct it must still be on the line ab, and if near land or any 
danger the direction of this line, even if no subsequent observation 
be available, will often give most valuable information. If, while 
waiting for the sun to change its bearing, the ship runs from B toC, 
a line cd drawn through C parallel to ab will represent an arc on which 
the position lies when she is probably at C, which at tnis instant 
(10*30 a. m.) is the most probable position of the ship. 

If another observation of the sun for longitude is now made and 
the resulting position is D (lying of course in the same latitude as C), 
on drawing through D a line ef at ri^ht angles to the bearing of the 
sun (indicated by an arrow) we are right in assuming the position to 
be somewhere on such an arc as is represented by this line. 

Hence E, the intersection of the two arcs on which the position lies 
at the same instant, must be the true place when the last observation 
was taken at the supposed position D, the discrepancies being entirely 
due to the original unknown error in the assumed latitude of A, for 
had that been accurate the position on the original line ab would 
have been such that on laying off the course and distance from that 
position C would have coincided with E. 

Errors in the assumed latitude of as much in many cases as 30 m. 
will often be found to produce no practical difference in the resultant 
position, but of course the accuracy of the longitude found is entirely 
•dependent upon the chronometer, and in such cases as arise when the 
intersecting arcs make a small angle with each other 'great accuracy 
is required in the course and distance run between the times of 
observation. 

This method of finding both latitude and longitude at the same 
time is commonly known as " Sumner's " method from the publicity 
given to it in 1847 by the publication of an excellent pamphlet on the 
subject by a master of that name in the American mercantile marine, 
although in a modified form it was practised at a much earlier date 
in the British navy under the name of " cross bearings of the sun." 
Prior to the publication of azimuth tables in 1866 the calculation 
was more lengthy and troublesome, the work being practically 
doubled. 

We have taken an illustration from observations of the sun, but 
the method is^ obviously applicable to all heavenly bodies provided 
they are so^ situated that the arcs drawn will intersect at a good 
angle; this in twilight or at night-time is readily done by selecting 
two heavenly bodies whose bearings differ considerably, and in such 
cases the small complication of allowing for the run of the ship is 
often obviated by making the observations simultaneously. The 
armillary sphere or star globe is useful in selecting objects suitably 
situated. _ - 

The principle of Sumner's method has of recent years received a 
very important and valuable development under the name of the 
" new navigation." In this method, originally {proposed by Marc St 
Hilaire, a comparison is made between the altitude of a heavenly 
body as actually observed and that calculated from the supposed 
position of the ship. For instance, the position of an observer at the 
instant of observing a (true) altitude of the sun of 40 ° io' must be 
somewhere on a portion of the circumference of a circle (usually of 
such size that the portion considered may be represented on a chart 
by a straight line) having its centre in latitude equal to the sun's 
declination, and in longitude equal to the Greenwich apparent time 
at the instant, the radius of such a circle being equal to the sun's 
zenith distance of 49 50'. If at the same time the true altitude of 
the sun is from the estimated position of the ship calculated to be 
40 5', it is evident that the greater observed altitude must be owing 
to the ship being nearer to the centre of the circle than was supposed, 
and a line of position drawn through the estimated position at right 
angles to the bearing of the sun must be transferred parallel to itself 
through a distance of 5' towards the direction of the sun's bearing. 
The second line of position, obtained when the sun's bearing has 
altered some 25 , is dealt with in a similarway, and the intersection 
of the two lines so obtained gives the position of the ship at the time 
of second observation. This mode of procedure enables all observa- 
tions, whether near or far from the meridian, to be similarly dealt 
with; in all cases the altitude the heavenly body should have is 
computed and compared with what it actually has. The practice of 
problems such as the foregoing is greatly facilitated by the extended 
means of finding at any moment the azimuth or true bearing of a 
heavenly^ body. When the azimuth was only required for the de- 
termination of compass error, the valuable tables from which the 
computed results could be obtained by inspection were limited to 
those cases of most practical importance, but from the ingenious and 
simple graphical form known as Weir's azimuth diagram azimuths 
of all heavenly bodies, whose declinations extend from 6o° N. to 
6o° S., can be obtained during the whole time they are above the 
horizon, thus greatly facilitating the laying down lines of oosition. 

A careful record of everything pertaining to the navigation of the 
ship, with the results of all observations and calculated positions, is 
kept in the ship'slog, an official book of great importance, a rough 
original of which is kept on deck with entries made in it of all such 
events at the time of their occurrence. A copy of the headings of a 
page of this as transferred into the official log is here given : 

	Course. 
	Wind. 
	Direction. Force. 
	a S £ 
	a S I 
	& * I 
	Q tt H 
	Remarks. 

u The course entered here is that which would be indicated by the 
" standard " compass of the ship (placed in the most favourable 
magnetic position on board); that actually steered by is the one 
most conveniently seen by the helmsman. Comparisons between 
the latter and the " standard " are frequently made, their indications 
generally varying somewhat owing to the difference of deviation in 
different positions on the ship. The compass card is usually gradu- 
ated into points and degrees, but the course is always estimated in 
degrees. The speed is ascertained from the indication of the patent 
log, the hand log being generally only used as a rough check on this. 
Wind direction and force are the result of estimation ; as the speed 
and course of the ship so greatly affect the apparent direction and 
velocity no practical anemometer for use on board ship exists. Wind 
force is estimated in terms of what is known as the " Beaufort " 
scale, based on the supposed amount of sail a vessel could carry at 
the time. The height of the mercurial barometer is carefully read at 
the end of each watch, as also is the thermometer; the more sensitive 
aneroid barometer is kept in a very accessible position and more 
Jrequcntly referred to by the officer of the watch. When navigating 
in localities and during seasons at which circular storms or hurricanes 
may be expected (as known from the Barometer Manual) the baro- 
meter is anxiously and frequently watched, and at all times its indi- 
cation is compared with that normally experienced in the locality 
traversed as shown on the barometer charts, due allowance being 
made in the tropics for the ordinary daily movement. All observa- 
tions relating to ocean meteorology are of great service in the com- 
pilation and improvement of wind and current charts, and in many 
ships more extensive meteorological journals are voluntarily kept 
on forms supplied by the Meteorological Office. A knowledge of tnc 
temperature of the surface of the sea is often of great practical use in 
navigation as giving^ warning of _ change in direction of the surface 
ocean current, especially in localities where there exist near to each 
other warm and ccld currents setting in different directions, as, for 
instance, near the edge of the Gulf Stream. As an indication of the 
vicinity of ice such observations are usually much less trustworthy. 
On the completion of the calculations giving the ship's position 
at noon each day the results are tabulated in the ship's log on the 
following form : 

	Course 
	made good. 
	Distance. 
	Latitude. 
	Longitude. 
	Variation 
	Allowed. 
	True Bearings 
	and Distance. 
	Made 
	Good. 
	Through 
	the water. 
	D.R. 
	Obs. 
	D.R. 
	Obs. 
	Current. 

The course and distance made good each day are calculated by 
trigonometry betweenthe best determined positions at two successive 
noons, such positions in fine weather being always those determined 
astronomically, and the current being considered the difference in the 
positions at noon as determined astronomically and as calculated by 
dead reckoning since the previous noon; such differences, however, 
obviously include the errors of all kinds. The latitude and longitude 
found by dead reckoning are entered under that heading (D.R.). 
The astronomical positions of latitude and longitude (entered as 
" obs." or "by observation ") are very seldom both determined at 
noon, but are carried up or back to that instant by calculation from 
the intervening dead reckoning. The variation, allowed is taken 
from the published variation chart, on which the latest results of such 
observations are embodied at intervals of about ten years with the 
annual changes (as far as known) in different localities, thus enabling 
the navigator to obtain its value at intermediate dates. Finally the 
course and distance are calculated from the position of the ship at 
noon to either the port of destination or some prominent position or 
danger near to which the vessel must pass. This is enterea under the 
heading " true bearings and distance." 

Authorities. — The following list of some writers of navigation 
whose works have not been already mentioned may be found useful 
to refer to: Thomas Addison, Arithmetical Navigation (1625) — he was 
the first to apply logarithms; Antonio de Najera (Lisbon, 1628) 
follows Nunez and Cespedes, but corrects the declination of sun and 
stars; Sir R. Dudley, Varcano del mare (1630-1646, 2nd ed., 
Florence, 1661) — too ponderous for the use of seamen; Sir Jonas 
Moore (1681) — one of the best books of the period; William Jones 
(1702) — a useful compendium containing trigonometry applied to the 
various sailings, the use of the log, and tables of logarithms; Pierre 
Jean Bouguer, Traite complet de la navigation (folio, 1698) — good but 
too large; Manuel Pimental, VArte de navegar (Lisbon, 1712); 
Pierre Bouguer, jun., Nouveau traite de navigation (1753)— without 
tables, published at the request of the minister of marine, improved 
and shortened in 1760, under the superintendence of the astronomer 
Lacaille; Nathaniel Colson, The Mariner's New Calendar (i73§)-^a 
good book; Seller, Practical Navigation — a book very popular in its 
time (there was an edition as late as 1739); Samuel Dunn published 
good star charts and tables of latitude and longitude (1737), and 
framed concise rules for many problems on navigation (published by 
the board of longitude) ; John H. Moore, The Practical Navigator 
and Seaman's New Daily Assistant (1772) — very popular, and gener- 
ally used in the British navy — the 18th and 19th editions (1810,1814) 
were improved by J. Dessiou; W. Wilson (Edinburgh, 1773) — a 
treatise of good repute at the time; Samuel Dunn, New Epitome of 
Practical Navigation, or Guide to the Indian Seas (1777) — for the 
longitude he depends chiefly on a variation chart from observations 
by East Indiamen, and he still makes no mention of the Nautical 
Almanac or of parallel rulers; Samuel Dunn (probably a son of the 
last named, 1781) is the last writer who gives instructions for the use 
of the astrolabe: he also wrote on " lunars " (1783, 1793), a name 
which was generally adopted about this time, and published an 
excellent traverse table (1785), and Daily Uses of the Nautical 
Sciences, (1790) ; Horsburgh, Directory for East India Voyages (1805) ; 
A Mackay, The Complete Navigator (about 1791); 2nd ed. 1810) — 
there is no instruction for finding longitude by the chronometer. 
Kelly, Spherical Trigonometry and Nautical Astronomy (1796, 
4th ed., 1813) — clear and simple; N. Bowditch, Practical Navigator 
(1800) — passed through many editions and is now (in a revised form) 
the official text-book of the United States navy; J. W. Norie, 
Epitome of Navigation (1803, 21st ed. 1878) — still a favourite in the 
mercantile marine from its simplicity, and because navigation can 
be learned from it without a teacher; T. Kerigan, The Young 
Navigator's Guide to Nautical Astronomy (1821); Inman, Epitome 
of Navigation (182 1) — with an excellent volume of tables, formerly 
largely used in the British navy, 9th ed. (1854); E. Riddle, Naviga- 
tion and Nautical Astronomy (^rd ed. 1824, 9th ed., by Escott, 1871), 
still worthy of its high reputation ; J. T. Towson, Tables for Reduction 
of Ex-meridian Altitudes (4th ed. 1854), very useful; H. Raper, 
Practice of Navigation (1840, 10th ed. 1870), an excellent book; 
H. Evers, Navigation and Great Circle Sailing (1850), other works on 
the same subject by Merrifield and Evers (1868) and Evers (1875); 
R. M. Inskip, Navigation and Nautical Astronomy (1865), a useful 
book, without tables; T. H. Sumner, A Method of finding a Ship's 
Position by two Observations and Greenwich Time by Chronometer — 
this is set forth as a novelty, but was published by Captain R. Owen, 
R.N., early in the century, and practised by many officers; H. W. 
Jeans, Navigation and Nautical Astronomy (1858); Harbord, 
Glossary of Navigation (1863, enlarged ed. 1883), a very excellent 
book of reference; W. C. Bergen, Practice and Theory of Navigation 
(1872); Sir W. Thomson, Navigation, a Lecture (1876), well worth 
reading; Lecky, Wrinkles in Navigation (1880); Martin, Navigation 
and Nautical Astronomy, sanctioned for use in the British navy. 

(W. R. M.*) 


NAVIGATION LAWS. The laws grouped under this title are 
a branch rather of municipal law than of the general maritime 
law. They are based upon the right of a state to regulate the 
navigation of its own waters and to protect its own commerce. 
One of the most curious early books on the subject is Captain G. 
St Lo, England's Safetie or a Bridle lo Ike French King, proposing 
a sure Melhod for encouraging Navigalion (London, 2nd ed. 
1693). Navigation laws may be divided into two classes. The 
first class includes all laws designed to secure a commercial 
monopoly to the state which enacted them. In Great Britain 
the object was attained by the Navigation Acts, the earliest of 
which were those of 138 r and 1390, ordaining that no merchandise 
should be shipped out of the realm except in British ships on 
pain of forfeiture. The principal Navigation Act was that of 
1660 (Scottish, 1661, c. 45). Up to 1854 coasting trade was 
wholly restricted to British ships, and a British ship must have 
been navigated by a master who was a British subject, and by 
a crew of whom a certain proportion must have been British 
subjects. After 1854 the only relics of such restrictions were 
found in the provisions of the Customs Consolidation Act 1853, 
§ 324, by which, in order to secure reciprocity, prohibitions or 
restrictions may by order in council be imposed upon the ships 
of any country in which British ships are liable to similar pro- 
hibitions or restrictions. Subject to these exceptions, a foreign 
ship is in the same position as a British ship with regard to 
British trade. This right of foreign ships is expressly recognized 
by the Customs Law Consolidation Act 1876; by § 141 of that 
act foreign ships engaged in the coasting trade are not to be 
subject to higher rates than British ships. Any advantages 
which a British ship has, e.g. the right of claiming protection 
for her flag, the non-attachment to her of a maritime hen for 
necessaries supplied in a British port, are not directly connected 
with the policy under which the Navigation Acts have become 
obsolete. These advantages are not secured to a British ship 
until she is registered. United States law agrees with British ' 
in this respect. " The United States have imitated the policy 
of England and other commercial nations in conferring peculiar 
privileges upon American-built ships and owned by our own 
citizens. . . . The object of the Registry Acts is to encourage 
our own trade, navigation and shipbuilding by granting peculiar 
or exclusive privileges of trade to the flag of the United States, 
and by prohibiting the communication of those immunities 
to the shipping and mariners of other countries " (Kent, 
Comm. iii. 139). It may be noticed that an alien is generally 
incapable of becoming the owner of a ship. This incapacity was 
specially preserved in the case of British ships by the Naturaliza- 
tion Act 1870, § 14. 

The second class of navigation laws includes those which deal 
with the navigation of any waters over which a state has any 
control, and embraces all that is necessary for the due use of such 
waters, as rules of the road, management of harbours and light- 
houses, and licensing and control of pilots. Such laws may deal 
with (1) the high seas, (2) tidal waters other than the high seas, 
(3) non-tidal waters. 

1. The claims of various nations to dominion over parts of the high 
seas have now become matters of merely historical interest. Such 
claims have been at different times advanced by Great Britain, 
Holland, Spain and Portugal, and were once sufficiently important 
to evoke the Mare Liberum of Grotius and the Mare Clausum of 
John Selden. It may be noted that in 1893 the Court of Arbitration 
on the Bering Sea Fisheries found that Russia had never claimed or 
exercised exclusive jurisdiction over the Bering Sea outside terri- 
torial waters and that the United States had no further right than 
had Russia at the time of the cession of Alaska in 1867. Rules for 
the navigation of the high seas may still be promulgated by any 
government. In Great Britain such rules, generally known as the 
" Sailing Rules," have been made by order in council under the 
powers of the Merchant Shipping Act 1862; the rules at present in 
Force are those contained in the order of the 27th of November 1896, 
L.G. No. 1082, as amended by subsequent orders in council. The 
order of 1896 was extended by the order of 1897, L.G. No. 572, to the 
ships of most foreign countries, with a special provision as to China. 
In the case of a state which has not assented to them, the only rules 
enforceable are the general rules of the sea, gradually ascertained by 
individual cases before courts of admiralty. 

2. For the navigation of its tidal waters — as far as they are 
territorial — a state ma^ legislate without the assent of other states. 
An example of such legislation is afforded by the Territorial Waters 
Jurisdiction Act 1878, a measure passed in consequence of the 
celebrated case of R. v. Keyn, L.R. 2 Ex. D., 126 (the *' Franconia " 
case), in 1876. Under the head of territorial waters would fall the 
" narrow seas " (as the Bristol Channel, Great Belt or Straits of 
Messina), bays and harbours, estuaries and arms of the sea, navigable 
tidal rivers, and the sea for. the distance of a marine league from the 
shore. Such waters being res publicae though not res communes, as 
are the high seas, are prima facie subject to the jurisdiction of the 
state. In England the soil under such waters, or at least under all but 
the last kind, is prima facie vested in the crown, subject to the public 
rights of fishery and anchorage. For the distance of a marine league 
from low-water mark the crown has certainly jurisdiction for police 
and revenue purposes. This is a rule of general international law. 
It may be noted that the Institut de Droit International proposed to 
double this limit. See Hall, International Law Qjth ed.), p. 154. In 
England the navigation of most of the principal tidal waters is 
governed by rules contained in acts of parliament and orders in 
council, the latter for the most part promulgated under the authority 
given by the Merchant Shipping Act 1862. For instance, there are 
numerous orders relating to the Thames, Mersey, Tees and other 
important rivers. 

3. Non-tidal waters, even though navigable, are in Great Britain 
prima facie private waters, in which the right of navigation does not 
exist as a public franchise, but can only be acquired by prescription 
founded on a presumed grant by an owner. In Roman law and in 
the Code Napoleon it is otherwise. Navigable rivers in those systems 
are always publici juris, whether tidal or norf-tidal. Navigation of 
non-tidal waters in the United Kingdom, whether natural or artificial, 
is now almost entirely regulated by various Navigation and Con- 
servancy Acts, e.g, the Thames Conservancy Acts, the Shannon, 
Trent, Lee, &c, Navigation Acts, and the various Canal Acts, 
especially the Manchester Ship Canal Act 1885. It may be noticed 
that the crown is empowered by the Merchant Shipping Act 1862 
to make rules for the navigation of inland waters, even when artificial, 
on the application of the proprietors. Examples of such rules are 
the orders in council regulating the Mersey and Irwell navigation and 
the Bridgewater navigation, 18th May 1870. Such waters being 
private property, the application for the rules by the proprietors is 
recited in the order in council. 

The distinction drawn in the United States between navigable and 
boatable rivers seems to be peculiar to that country, unless indeed it 
is analogous to the " fleuves et rivieres navigables ou fiottables " of 
the Code Napoleon, § 538. It is at least unknown in Great Britain. 

Remedies for Obstruction and Pollution. — These^ may be either 
criminal or civil — the criminal by indictment or information, the 
civil by action for damages or for an injunction, in addition to the 
criminal remedy, where special damage has been sustained. Pollu- 
tion is expressly provided for by the Rivers Pollution Prevention 
Act 1876, which gives jurisdiction to county courts in cases within 
the act. 

International Law. — The international law as to the navigation of 
the high seas has been sketched above. Reference should also be 
made to what is known as the " Rule of the War of 1756 " to the 
effect that where a colonial or coasting trade is prohibited to other 
nations in time of peace, a neutral by engaging in this trade by 
permission of a belligerent in time of war is liable to the other 
belligerent. The leading case is The Immanuel (1799). 2 C. 
Robinson's Rep. 186. Regulations for the coasting trade may be 
made by the government of India under the powers of the Customs 
Consolidation Act 1853, § 329, and by the legislature of a British 
possession under the Merchant Shipping Act 1894, § 736. Asto 
territorial waters, it is the general though not the universal opinion 
of jurists that the state to which the territorial waters belong has a 
right to forbid their navigation by foreigners. The free navigation of 
rivers has often been the subject of treaties, almost necessarily so 
where a river is the boundary between two states. In such a case, 
if a state were to maintain the strict letter of its rights, navigation 
would be almost impossible, as each state is proprietor down to the 
middle line of the bed of the river, the medium filum aquae or thalweg. 

By* the treaty of Vienna in 1815 it was provided that the navigation 
of all rivers separating or traversing the states that were parties 
thereto should be open for commercial purposes to the vessels of all 
nations, subject to a uniform system of police and tolls. The treaty 
of Paris, 1856, extended this principle to the Danube. In America 
the cases of the Mississippi and the St Lawrence are important. ' By 
the treaty of Versailles, 1783, it was provided that " the navigation of 
the Mississippi shall for ever remain free and open to the subjects 
of Great Bntain and the citizens of the United States." But the 
United States afterwards acquired Louisiana and Florida; and, the 
stipulation as to British subjects not being renewed in the treaty of 
Ghent, 1814, the United States maintains that the right of navigat- 
ing the Mississippi is vested exclusively in its citizens. As to the St 
Lawrence, after disputes for a long period between Great Britain and 
the United States, the right of free navigation for purposes of 
commerce was secured to the United States by the treaty of Washing- 
ton, 1871. There are some waters, such as the Suez Canal and the 
Panama Canal, which are subject to peculiar engagements by treaty 
or convention. The former depends on the Convention of Con- 
stantinople, 29th of October 1888, the latter — as far as regards the 
United Kingdom and the United States — on the Hay-Pauncefote 
Treaty, 18th of November 1901. But as a rule it may be said that in 
time of peace the territorial waters of a state are open to foreigners 
for commercial purposes, subject to observance of any rules as to 
police, pilotage, &c, imposed by the state. Tolls may be imposed by 
the state upon foreigners. This right is expressly recognized in most 
commercial treaties. A notable instance was the claim of Denmark 
to charge what were called the " Sound dues " from all vessels passing 
Elsinore, though the Sound was not strictly her territorial water. 
The right was not universally recognized, though it had prescription 
in its favour and was invariably paid. In 1857 the dues were 
abolished, and compensation paid to Denmark for the loss of her 
alleged right. (J. W.) 


NAVIUS, ATTUS, in Roman legendary history, a famous 
augur during the reign of Tarquinius Priscus. When the latter 
desired to double the number of the equestrian centuries, Navius 
opposed him, declaring that it must not be done unless the 
omens were propitious, and, as a proof of his powers of divination, 
cut through a whetstone with a razor. Navius's statue with 
veiled head was afterwards shown in the comitium; the whet- 
stone and razor were buried in the same place, and a puteal 
placed over them. Hard by was a sacred fig-tree, called after 
him the Navian fig-tree. It was reported that Navius was subse- 
quently put to death by Tarquinius. According to Schwegler, 
the puteal originally indicated that the place had been struck 
by lightning, and the story is a reminiscence of the early struggle 
between the state and ecclesiasticism. 

See Livy 1. 36; Dion. Halic. iii. 70; Aurelius Victor,* De viris 
illuslribus, 6; Schwegler, Romische Geschichte, bk. xv. 16. 


NAVVY, a labourer employed in the digging and excavating 
of earth, &c, in the construction of railways, docks, canals or 
other engineering operations. The word is a shortened form of 
" navigator," applied, during the 18th and early part of the 19th 
centuries to a labourer at work on canals, to which the name 
" navigation " is often applied. Power-machines (excavators) 
for performing such work are consequently known as " steam- 
navvies." 