ANHALT-DESSAU, LEOPOLD I., PRINCE OF (1676-1747), called the "Old
Dessauer" (Alter Dessauer), general field marshal in the Prussian
army, was the only surviving son of John George II., prince of
Anhalt-Dessau, and was born on the 3rd of July 1676 at Dessau. From
his earliest youth he was devoted to the profession of arms, for which
he educated himself physically and mentally. He became colonel of a
Prussian regiment in 1693, and in the same year his father's death
placed him at the head of his own principality; thereafter, during the
whole of his long life, he performed the duties of a sovereign prince
and a Prussian officer. His first campaign was that of 1695 in
the Netherlands, in which he was present at the siege of Namur. He
remained in the field to the end of the war of 1697, the affairs
of the principality being managed chiefly by his mother, Princess
Henriette Catherine of Orange. In 1698 he married Anna Luise Föse,
an apothecary's daughter of Dessau, in spite of his mother's long and
earnest opposition, and subsequently he procured for her the rank of
a princess from the emperor (1701). Their married life was long and
happy, and the princess acquired an influence over the stern nature of
her husband which she never ceased to exert on behalf of his subjects,
and after the death of Leopold's mother she performed the duties of
regent when he was absent on campaign. Often, too, she accompanied him
into the field. Leopold's career as a soldier in important commands
begins with the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession. He had
made many improvements in the Prussian army, notably the introduction
of the iron ramrod about 1700, and he now took the field at the
head of a Prussian corps on the Rhine, serving at the sieges of
Kaiserswerth and Venlo. In the following year (1703), having obtained
the rank of lieutenant-general, Leopold took part in the siege of Bonn
and distinguished himself very greatly in the battle of Höchstädt, in
which the Austrians and their allies were defeated by the French under
Marshal Villars (September 20, 1703). In the campaign of 1704
the Prussian contingent served under Prince Louis of Baden and
subsequently under Eugene, and Leopold himself won great glory by his
conduct at Blenheim. In 1705 he was sent with a Prussian corps to join
Prince Eugene in Italy, and on the 16th of August he displayed his
bravery at the hard-fought battle of Cassano. In the following year he
added to his reputation in the battle of Turin, where he was the first
to enter the hostile entrenchments (September 7, 1706). He served
in one more campaign in Italy, and then went with Eugene to join
Marlborough in the Netherlands, being present in 1709 at the siege
of Tournay and the battle of Malplaquet. In 1710 he succeeded to the
command of the whole Prussian contingent at the front, and in 1712, at
the particular desire of the crown prince, Frederick William, who had
served with him as a volunteer, he was made a general field marshal.
Shortly before this he had executed a _coup de main_ on the castle
of Mörs, which was held by the Dutch in defiance of the claims of the
king of Prussia to the possession. The operation was effected with
absolute precision and the castle was seized without a shot being
fired. In the earlier part of the reign of Frederick William I.,
the prince of Dessau was one of the most influential members of
the Prussian governing circle. In the war with Sweden (1715) he
accompanied the king to the front, commanded an army of 40,000 men,
and met and defeated Charles XII. in a severe battle on the island
of Rügen (November 16). His conduct of the siege of Stralsund which
followed was equally skilful, and the great results of the war
to Prussia were largely to be attributed to his leadership in the
campaign. In the years of peace, and especially after a court quarrel
(1725) and duel with General von Grumbkow, he devoted himself to the
training of the Prussian army. The reputation it had gained in the
wars of 1675 to 1715, though good, gave no hint of its coming glory,
and it was even in 1740 accounted one of the minor armies of Europe.
That it proved, when put to the test, to be by far the best military
force existing, may be taken as the summary result of Leopold's work.
The "Old Dessauer" was one of the sternest disciplinarians in an age
of stern discipline, and the technical training of the infantry, under
his hand, made them superior to all others in the proportion of five
to three (see AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION, WAR OF THE). He was essentially an
infantry soldier; in his time artillery did not decide battles, but he
suffered the cavalry service, in which he felt little interest, to
be comparatively neglected, with results which appeared at Mollwitz.
Frederick the Great formed the cavalry of Hohenfriedberg and Leuthen
himself, but had it not been for the incomparable infantry trained by
the "Old Dessauer" he would never have had the opportunity of doing
so. Thus Leopold, heartily supported by Frederick William, who was
himself called the great drill-master of Europe, turned to good
account the twenty years following the peace with Sweden. During this
time two incidents in his career call for special mention: first,
his intervention in the case of the crown prince Frederick, who
was condemned to death for desertion, and his continued and finally
successful efforts to secure Frederick's reinstatement in the Prussian
army; and secondly, his part in the War of the Polish Succession on
the Rhine, where he served under his old chief Eugene and held the
office of field marshal of the Empire.

With the death of Frederick William in 1740, Frederick succeeded to
the Prussian throne, and a few months later took place the invasion
and conquest of Silesia, the first act in the long Silesian wars and
the test of the work of the "Old Dessauer's" lifetime. The prince
himself was not often employed in the king's own army, though his sons
held high commands under Frederick. The king, indeed, found Leopold,
who was reputed, since the death of Eugene, the greatest of living
soldiers, somewhat difficult to manage, and the prince spent most of
the campaigning years up to 1745 in command of an army of observation
on the Saxon frontier. Early in that year his wife died. He was
now over seventy, but his last campaign was destined to be the most
brilliant of his long career. A combined effort of the Austrians and
Saxons to retrieve the disasters of the summer by a winter campaign
towards Berlin itself led to a hurried concentration of the Prussians.
Frederick from Silesia checked the Austrian main army and hastened
towards Dresden. But before he had arrived, Leopold, no longer in
observation, had decided the war by his overwhelming victory of
Kesselsdorf (December 14, 1745). It was his habit to pray before
battle, for he was a devout Lutheran. On this last field his words
were, "O Lord God, let me not be disgraced in my old days. Or if Thou
wilt not help me, do not help these scoundrels, but leave us to try it
ourselves." With this great victory Leopold's career ended. He retired
from active service, and the short remainder of his life was spent at
Dessau, where he died on the 7th of April 1747.

He was succeeded by his son, LEOPOLD II., MAXIMILIAN, PRINCE OF
ANHALT-DESSAU (1700-1751), who was one of the best of Frederick's
subordinate generals, and especially distinguished himself by the
capture of Glogau in 1741, and his generalship at Mollwitz, Chotusitz
(where he was made general field marshal on the field of battle),
Hohenfriedberg and Soor.

Another son, PRINCE DIETRICH OF ANHALT-DESSAU (d. 1769), was also a
distinguished Prussian general.

But the most famous of the sons was PRINCE MORITZ OF ANHALT-DESSAU
(1712-1760), who entered the Prussian army in 1725, saw his first
service as a volunteer in the War of the Polish Succession (1734-35),
and in the latter years of the reign of Frederick William held
important commands. In the Silesian wars of Frederick II., Moritz,
the ablest of the old Leopold's sons, greatly distinguished himself,
especially at the battle of Hohenfriedberg (Striegau), 1745. At
Kesselsdorf it was the wing led by the young Prince Moritz that
carried the Austrian lines and won the "Old Dessauer's" last fight. In
the years of peace preceding the Seven Years' War, Moritz was employed
by Frederick the Great in the colonizing of the waste lands of
Pomerania and the Oder Valley. When the king took the field again in
1756, Moritz was in command of one of the columns which hemmed in the
Saxon army in the lines of Pirna, and he received the surrender of
Rutowski's force after the failure of the Austrian attempts at relief.
Next year Moritz underwent changes of fortune. At the battle of Kolin
he led the left wing, which, through a misunderstanding with the
king, was prematurely drawn into action and failed hopelessly. In
the disastrous days which followed, Moritz was under the cloud of
Frederick's displeasure. But the glorious victory of Leuthen (December
5, 1757) put an end to this. At the close of that day, Frederick
rode down the lines and called out to General Prince Moritz,
"I congratulate you, Herr Feldmarschall!" At Zorndorf he again
distinguished himself, but at the surprise of Hochkirch fell wounded
into the hands of the Austrians. Two years later, soon after his
release, his wound proved mortal.

AUTHORITIES.--Varnhagen von Ense, _Preuss. biographische Denkmale_,
vol. ii. (3rd ed., 1872); _Militar Konversations-Lexikon_, vol. ii.
(Leipzig, 1833); Anon., _Fürst Leopold I. von Anhalt und seine Sohne_
(Dessau, 1852); G. Pauli, _Leben grosser Helden_, vol. vi.; von
Orlich, _Prinz Moritz von Anhalt-Dessau_ (Berlin, 1842); Crousatz,
_Militarische Denkwurdigkeiten des Fürsten Leopold von Anhalt-Dessau_
(1875); supplements to _Militär Wochenblatt_ (1878 and 1889); Siebigk,
_Selbstbiographie des Fürsten Leopold von Anhalt-Dessau_ (Dessau,
1860 and 1876); Hosäus, _Zur Biographie des Fürsten Leopold von
Anhalt-Dessau_ (Dessau, 1876); Würdig, _Des Alten Dessauers Leben und
Taten_ (3rd ed., Dessau, 1903); _Briefe Konig Friedrich Wilhelms I. an
den Fürsten L._ (Berlin, 1905).