ATHLETE (Gr. [Greek: athletes]; Lat. _athleta_), in Greek and Roman
antiquities, one who contended for a prize ([Greek: athlon]) in the
games; now a general term for any one excelling in physical strength.
Originally denoting one who took part in musical, equestrian, gymnastic,
or any other competitions, the name became restricted to the competitors
in gymnastic contests, and, later, to the class of professional
athletes. Whereas in earlier times competitors, who were often persons
of good birth and position, entered the lists for glory, without any
idea of material gain, the professional class, which arose as early as
the 5th century B.C., was chiefly recruited from the lower orders, with
whom the better classes were unwilling to associate, and took up
athletics entirely as a means of livelihood. Ancient philosophers,
moralists and physicians were almost unanimous in condemning the
profession of athletics as injurious not only to the mind but also to
the body. The attack made upon it by Euripides in the fragment of the
_Autolycus_ is well known. The training for the contests was very
rigorous. The matter of diet was of great importance; this was
prescribed by the _aleiptes_, whose duty it also was to anoint the
athlete's body. At one time the principal food consisted of fresh
cheese, dried figs and wheaten bread. Afterwards meat was introduced,
generally beef, or pork; but the bread and meat were taken separately,
the former at breakfast, the latter at dinner. Except in wine, the
quantity was unlimited, and the capacity of some of the heavy-weights
must have been, if such stories as those about Milo are true, enormous.
In addition to the ordinary gymnastic exercises of the palaestra, the
athletes were instructed in carrying heavy loads, lifting weights,
bending iron rods, striking at a suspended leather sack filled with sand
or flour, taming bulls, &c. Boxers had to practise delving the ground,
to strengthen their upper limbs. The competitions open to athletes were
running, leaping, throwing the discus, wrestling, boxing and the
pancratium, or combination of boxing and wrestling. Victory in this last
was the highest achievement of an athlete, and was reserved only for men
of extraordinary strength. The competitors were naked, having their
bodies salved with oil. Boxers wore the _caestus_, a strap of leather
round the wrists and forearms, with a piece of metal in the fist, which
was sometimes employed with great barbarity. An athlete could begin his
career as a boy in the contests set apart for boys. He could appear
again as a youth against his equals, and though always unsuccessful,
could go on competing till the age of thirty-five, when he was debarred,
it being assumed that after this period of life he could not improve.
The most celebrated of the Greek athletes whose names have been handed
down are Milo of Crotona, Hipposthenes, Polydamas, Promachus and
Glaucus. Cyrene, famous in the time of Pindar for its athletes, appears
to have still maintained its reputation to at least the time of
Alexander the Great; for in the British Museum are to be seen six prize
vases carried off from the games at Athens by natives of that district.
These vases, found in the tombs, probably, of the winners, are made of
clay, and painted on one side with a representation of the contest in
which they were won, and on the other side with a figure of Pallas
Athena, with an inscription telling where they were gained, and in some
cases adding the name of the eponymous magistrate of Athens, from which
the exact year can be determined.

Amongst the Romans athletic contests had no doubt taken place from the
earliest times, but according to Livy (xxxix. 22) professional Greek
athletes were first introduced at Rome by M. Fulvius Nobilior in 186
B.C. After the institution of the Actian games by Augustus, their
popularity increased, until they finally supplanted the gladiators. In
the time of the empire, gilds or unions of athletes were formed, each
with a temple, treasury and exercise-ground of its own. The profession,
although it ranked above that of a gladiator or an actor, was looked
upon as derogatory to the dignity of a Roman, and it is a rare thing to
find a Roman name amongst the athletes on inscriptions. The system was
entirely, and the athletes themselves nearly always, Greek. (See also
GAMES, CLASSICAL.)

  Krause, _Gymnastik und Agonistik der Hellenen_ (1841); Friedländer,
  _Sittengeschichte Roms_, ii.; Reisch, in Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyc_.