ATHLETIC SPORTS. Various sports were cultivated many hundred years
before the Christian era by the Egyptians and several Asiatic races,
from whom the early Greeks undoubtedly adopted the elements of their
athletic exercises (see ATHLETE), which reached their highest
development in the Olympic games, and other periodical meetings of the
kind (see GAMES, CLASSICAL). The original Celtic inhabitants of Great
Britain were an athletic race, and the earliest monuments of Teutonic
literature abound in records of athletic prowess. After the Norman
conquest of England the nobles devoted themselves to the chase and to
the joust, while the people had their games of ball, running at the
quintain, fencing with club and buckler, wrestling and other pastimes on
green and river. The chroniclers of the succeeding centuries are for the
most part silent concerning the sports of the folk, except such as were
regarded as a training for war, as archery, while they love to record
the prowess of the kings and their courts. Thus it is told of Henry V.
that he "was so swift a runner that he and two of his lords, without bow
or other engine, would take a wild buck in a large park." Several
romances of the middle ages, quoted by Strutt (_Sports and Pastimes of
the People of England_), chronicle the fact that young men of good
family were taught to run, leap, wrestle and joust. In spite of the
general silence of the historians concerning the sports of the people,
it is evident that they were indulged in very largely, since several
English sovereigns found it necessary to curtail, and even prohibit,
certain popular pastimes, on the ground that they seduced the people
from the practice of archery. Thus Edward III. prohibited weight-putting
by statute. Nevertheless a variety of this exercise, "casting of the
barre," continued to be a popular pastime, and was afterwards one of the
favourite sports of Henry VIII., who attained great proficiency at it.
The prowess of the same monarch at throwing the hammer is a matter of
history, and his reign seems to have been at a time of general athletic
revival. We even find his secretary, Richard Pace, advising the sons of
noblemen to practise their sports and "leave study and learning to the
children of meaner people," and Sir William Forest, in his _Poesye of
Princeelye Practice_, thus admonishes his high-born readers:--

  "In featis of maistries bestowe some diligence.
   Too ryde, runne, lepe, or caste by violence
   Stone, barre or plummett, or such other thinge,
   It not refuseth any prince or kynge."

Mr Montague Shearman, to whose volume on _Athletics_ in the Badminton
series the reader is referred, notes that Sir Thomas Elyot, who wrote at
about the same period, deprecated too much study and flogging for
schoolboys, saying: "A discrete master may with as much or more ease
both to himself and his scholler lead him to play at tennis or shoote."
Elyot recommends the perusal of Galen's _De sanitate tuenda_, and
suggests as suitable athletic exercises within doors "deambulations,
labouryng with poyses made of ledde, lifting and throwing the heavy
stone or barre, playing at tennis," and dwells upon "rennyng" as a "good
exercise and laudable solace." It is probable that the disciples of the
"new learning," who had become prominent in Sir Thomas's time,
endeavoured to combat the influence of athletic exercises, their point
of view being exemplified by the dictum of Roger Ascham, who, in his
_Toxophilus_, declares that "running, leaping and quoiting be too vile
for scholars."

In the 16th century the great football match played annually at Chester
was abolished in favour of a series of foot-races, which took place in
the presence of the mayor. A list of the common sports of that time is
contained in some verses by Randel Holme, a minstrel of the North
country, and makes mention of throwing the sledge, jumping, "wrastling,"
stool-ball (cricket), running, pitching the bar, shooting, playing
loggets, "nine holes or ten pins," "football by the shinnes," leap-frog,
morris, shove-groat, leaping the bonfire, stow-ball (golf), and many
other outdoor and indoor sports, some of them now obsolete. Shakespeare
and the other Elizabethan poets abound in allusions to sport, which
formed an important feature in school life and at every fair. The Stuart
kings were warm encouragers of sport, the _Basilikon Doron_ of James I.,
written for his son, containing a recommendation to the young prince to
practise "running, leaping, wrestling, fencing, dancing, and playing at
the caitch, or tennise, archerie, palle-malle, and such like other fair
and pleasant field games."

An extraordinary variety of sports has been popular in Great Britain
with high and low for the past five centuries, no other country
comparing with it in this respect. Nor have Ireland and Scotland lagged
behind England in athletic prowess. Indeed, so far as history and legend
record, Ireland boasts of by far the most ancient organized sports
known, the Tailtin Games, or Lugnasad, traditionally established by
Lugaid of the Long Arm, one of the gods of Dia and Ana, in honour of his
foster-mother Tailti, some three thousand years ago. For many centuries
these games, and others like them, were kept up in Ireland, and though
the almost constant wars which harried the country finally destroyed
their organization, yet the Irish have always been, and still are, a
very important factor in British athletics, as well as in America and
the colonies.

The Scottish people have, like the Irish, ever delighted in feats of
strength and skill, especially the Celtic highlanders, the character of
whose country and mode of life have, however, prevented organized
athletics from attaining the same prominence as in England.
Nevertheless, the celebrated Highland games held at Braemar, Bridge of
Allan, Luss, Aboyne and other places have served to bring into
prominence many athletes of the first class, although the records, on
account of the roughness of the grounds, have not generally vied with
those made farther south.

The Briton does not lose his love of sport upon leaving his native soil,
and the development of athletics in the United States and the British
colonies has kept step with that of the mother-land. Upon the continent
of Europe sports have occupied a more or less prominent place in the
life of the nations, but their development has been but an echo of that
in Great Britain. A great advance, however, has been made since the
institution of the modern Olympic games.

About the year 1812 the Royal Military College at Sandhurst inaugurated
regular athletic sports, but the example was not followed until about
1840, when Rugby, Eton, Harrow, Shrewsbury and the Royal Military
Academy at Woolwich came to the front, the "Crick Run" at Rugby having
been started in 1837. At the two great English universities there were
no organized sports of any kind until 1850, when Exeter College, Oxford,
held a meeting; this example has been followed, one after the other, by
the other colleges of both institutions. The first contest between
Oxford and Cambridge occurred at Oxford in 1864, the programme
consisting of eight events, of which four were won by each side. The
same year saw the first contest of the Civil Servants, still an annual
event.

In 1866 the Amateur Athletic Club was formed in London for "gentlemen
amateurs," most of its members being old university men. Its first
championship meeting, held in that year, was the beginning of a series
afterwards continued to the present day by the Amateur Athletic
Association, founded in 1880, which has jurisdiction over British
athletic sports. The most important individual English athletic
organization is the London Athletic Club, which antedated the Amateur
Athletic Club, and whose meetings have always been the most important
events except the championships.

In America a revival of interest in athletic sports took place about the
year 1870. Ten years later was formed the National Association of
Amateur Athletes of America, which, in 1888, became the Amateur Athletic
Union. This body controls athletics throughout the United States, and is
allied with the Canadian Amateur Athletic Association. It is supreme in
matters of amateur status, records and licensing of meetings, and has
control over the following branches of sport: basket-ball, billiards,
boxing, fencing (in connexion with the Amateur Fencers' League of
America), gymnastics, hand-ball (fives), running, jumping, walking,
weight-putting (hammer, shot, discus, weights), hurdle-racing, lacrosse,
pole-vaulting, swimming, tugs-of-war and wrestling. The Amateur Athletic
Union has eight sectional groups, and is allied with the Intercollegiate
Association of Amateur Athletes of America (founded 1876) and the
Western Intercollegiate Association. The first American intercollegiate
athletic meeting took place at Saratoga in 1873, only three universities
competing, though the next year there were eight and in 1875 thirteen.
Professional athletes in America are confined almost entirely to
base-ball, boxing, bicycling, wrestling and physical training.

The Canadian athletic championships are held independently of the
American. Annual championship meetings are also held in South Africa,
New Zealand and the different states of Australia. For the Australasian
championships New Zealand joins with Australia.

The organization of university sports in America differs from that at
Oxford and Cambridge, where there is no official control on the part of
the university authorities, and where a man is eligible to represent his
college or university while in residence. In nearly all American
universities and colleges athletic and other sports are under the
general control of faculty committees, to which the undergraduate
athletic committees are subordinate, and which have the power to forbid
the participation of any student who has not attained a certain standard
of scholarship. For some years prior to 1906 no student of an American
university was allowed to represent his university in any sport for
longer than four years. Early in that year, however, many of the most
important institutions, including Harvard, Yale, Princeton and
Pennsylvania, entered upon a new agreement, that only students who have
been in residence one year should play in 'varsity teams in any branch
of athletics and that no student should play longer than three years.
This, together with many other reformatory changes, was directly due to
a widespread outcry against the growing roughness of play exhibited in
American football, basket-ball, hockey and other sports, the too evident
desire to win at all hazards, the extraordinary luxury of the training
equipment, and the enormous gate-receipts of many of the large
institutions--the Yale Athletic Association held a surplus of about
$100,000 (£20,000) in December 1905, after deducting immense amounts for
expenses. The new rule against the participation of freshmen in 'varsity
sports was to discourage the practice of offering material advantages of
different kinds to promising athletes, generally those at preparatory
schools, to induce them to become students at certain universities.

At the present day athletic sports are usually understood to consist of
those events recognized in the championship programmes of the different
countries. Those in the competitions between Oxford and Cambridge are
the 100 yards, 440 yards, 880 yards, 1-mile and 3-mile runs; 120 yards
hurdle-race; high and long jumps; throwing the hammer; and putting the
weight (shot). To the above list the English A.A.A. adds the 4-mile and
10-mile runs; the 2-mile and 7-mile walking races; the 2-mile
steeplechase; and the pole-vault. The American intercollegiate programme
is identical with that of the Oxford-Cambridge meeting, except that a
2-mile run takes the place of the 3-mile, and the pole-vault is added.
The American A.A.U. programme includes the 100 yards, 220 yards, 440
yards, 880 yards, 1-mile and 5-mile runs; 120 yards high-hurdle race;
220 yards low-hurdle race; high and broad (long) jumps; throwing the
hammer; throwing 56-lb. weight; putting 16-lb. shot; throwing the
discus; and pole-vault. Of these the running contests are called "track
athletics," and the rest "field" events.

International athletic contests of any importance have, with the
exception of the modern Olympic games, invariably taken place between
Britons, Americans and Canadians, the continental European countries
having as yet produced few track or field athletes of the first class,
although the interest in sports in general has greatly increased in
Europe during the last ten years. In 1844 George Seward, an American
professional runner, visited England and competed with success against
the best athletes there; and in 1863 Louis Bennett, called "Deerfoot," a
full-blooded Seneca Indian, repeated Seward's triumphs, establishing
running records up to 12 miles. In 1878 the Canadian, C.C. McIvor,
champion sprinter of America, went to England, but failed to beat his
British professional rivals. In 1881 L.E. Myers of New York and E.E.
Merrill of Boston competed successfully in England, Myers winning every
short-distance championship except the 100-yards, and Merrill all the
walking championships save the 7-miles. The same year W.C. Davies of
England won the 5-mile championship of America, but, like several other
British runners who have had success in America, he competed under the
colours of an American club. In 1882 the famous English runner, W.G.
George, ran against Myers in America in races of 1 mile, ¾ mile and ½
mile, winning over the first two distances. In 1884 Myers again went to
England and made new British records over 500, 600, 800 and 1000 yards,
and world's records over ½ mile and 1200 yards. The next year he won
both the British ¼-mile and ½-mile championships. The same year a team
of Irish athletes, among them W.J.M. Barry, won several Canadian
championships. In 1888 a team of the Manhattan Athletic Club, New York,
competed in England with fair success, and during the same season an
Irish team from the Gaelic Athletic Association visited America without
much success. In 1890 a team from the Salford Harriers was invited to
America by the Manhattan Athletic Club, but the evidently commercial
character of the enterprise caused its failure. One of the Harriers,
E.W. Parry, won the American steeplechase championship. The next year
saw another visit to Europe of the Manhattan athletes, who had fair
success in England and won every event at Paris. In 1895 the London
Athletic Club team competed in New York against the New York Athletic
Club, but lost every one of the eleven events, several new records being
established. During the previous summer (1894) occurred the first of the
international matches between British and American universities which
still retain their place as the most interesting athletic event. In that
contest, which took place at Queen's Club, London, Oxford beat Yale by
5½ to 3½ events. The next summer Cambridge, as the champion English
university, visited America and was beaten by Yale (3 to 8). In 1899
both British universities competed at Queen's Club against the combined
athletes of Harvard and Yale, who were beaten by the odd event. The
return match took place between the same universities at New York in the
summer of 1901, the Americans winning 6 to 3 events. In 1904 Harvard and
Yale beat Oxford and Cambridge at Queen's Club by the same score.

Outside Great Britain and America the most important athletic events are
undoubtedly the revived Olympic games. They were instituted by delegates
from the different nations who met in Paris on the 16th of June 1894,
principally at the instigation of Baron Pierre de Coubertin, the result
being the formation of an International Olympic Games Committee with
Baron de Coubertin at its head, which resolved that games should be held
every fourth year in a different country. The first modern Olympiad took
place at Athens, 6th to 12th April 1896, in the ancient stadium, which
was rebuilt through the liberality of a Greek merchant and seated about
45,000 people. The programme of events included the usual field and
track sports, gymnastics, wrestling, pole-climbing, lawn tennis,
fencing, rifle and revolver shooting, weight-lifting, swimming, the
Marathon race and bicycle racing. Among the contestants were
representatives of nearly every European nation, besides Americans and
Australians. Great Britain took little direct interest in the occasion
and was inadequately represented, but the United States sent five men
from Boston and four from Princeton University, who, though none of them
held American championships, succeeded in winning every event for which
they were entered. The Marathon race of 42 kilometres (26 miles),
commemorative of the famous run of the Greek messenger to Athens with
the news of the victory of Marathon, was won by a Greek peasant. The
second Olympiad was held in Paris in June 1900. Again Great Britain was
poorly represented, but American athletes won eighteen of the
twenty-four championship events. The third Olympiad was held at St Louis
in the summer of 1904 in connexion with the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition, its success being due in great measure to James E. Sullivan,
the physical director of the Exposition, and Caspar Whitney, the
president of the American Olympic Games Committee. The games were much
more numerous than at the previous Olympiads, including sports of all
kinds, handicaps, inter-club competitions, and contests for aborigines.
In the track and field competitions the American athletes won every
championship except weight-throwing (56 lb.) and lifting the bar. The
sports of the savages, among whom were American Indians, Africans of
several tribes, Moros, Patagonians, Syrians, Ainus and Filipinos, were
disappointing; their efforts in throwing the javelin, shooting with bow
and arrow, weight-lifting, running and jumping, proving to be feeble
compared with those of white races. The Americanized Indians made the
best showing.

The Greeks, however, were not altogether satisfied with the cosmopolitan
character of the revival of these celebrated games of their ancestors,
and resolved to give the revival a more definitely Hellenic stamp by
intercalating an additional series, to take place at Athens, in the
middle of the quadrennial period. Their action was justified by the
success which attended the first of this additional series at Athens in
1906. This success may have been partly due to the personal interest
taken in the games by the king and royal family of Greece, and to the
presence of King Edward VII., Queen Alexandra, and the prince and
princess of Wales; but to whatever cause it should be assigned it was
generally acknowledged that neither in France nor in America had the
games acquired the same prestige as those held on the classical soil of
Greece. In 1906 the governments of Germany, France and the United States
made considerable grants of money to defray the expenses of the
competitors from those countries. These games aroused much more interest
in England than the earlier ones in the series, but though upwards of
fifty British competitors took part in the contests, they were by no
means representative in all cases of the best British athletics. The
American representatives were slightly less numerous, but they were more
successful. It was noteworthy that no British or Americans took part in
the rowing races in the Bay of Phalerum, nor in the tennis, football or
shooting competitions. The Marathon race, by far the most important
event in the games, was won in 1906 by a British athlete, M.D. Sherring,
a Canadian by birth. The Americans won a total of 75 prizes, the British
39, and the Swedes and Greeks each 28.

The games of the 4th Olympiad (1908) were held in London in connexion
with the Franco-British Exhibition of that year. An immense sensation
was caused by the finish for the Marathon race from Windsor Castle to
the stadium in the Exhibition grounds in London. The first competitor to
arrive was the Italian, Dorando Pietri, whose condition of physical
collapse was such that, appearing to be on the point of death, he had to
be assisted over the last few yards of the course. He was therefore
disqualified, and J. Hayes, an American, was adjudged the winner; a
special prize was presented to the Italian by Queen Alexandra. In the
whole series of contests the United Kingdom made 38 wins, the Americans
22, and the Swedes 7. In the Olympic games proper, British athletes,
including two wins by colonials from Canada and Africa, scored 25
successes, and the Americans 18. In the track events 8 wins fell to the
British, including two Colonials, and 6 to American athletes; but the
latter gained complete supremacy in the field events, of which they won
9, while British competitors secured only two of minor importance.

  For records, &c., see the annual _Sporting and Athletic Register_; for
  the Olympic games see Theodore Andrea Cook's volume, published in
  connexion with the Olympiad of 1908.