ATLANTIC OCEAN,

  Extent.

a belt of water, roughly of an S-shape, between the western coasts of
Europe and Africa and the eastern coasts of North and South America. It
extends northward to the Arctic Basin and southward to the Great
Southern Ocean. For purposes of measurement the polar boundaries are
taken to be the Arctic and Antarctic circles, although in discussing the
configuration and circulation it is impossible to adhere strictly to
these limits. The Atlantic Ocean consists of two characteristic
divisions, the geographical equator forming a fairly satisfactory line
of division into North and South Atlantic. The North Atlantic, by far
the best-known of the main divisions of the hydrosphere, is remarkable
for the immense length of its coast-line and for the large number of
enclosed seas connected with it, including on the western side the
Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico, the Gulf of St Lawrence and Hudson
Bay, and on the eastern side the Mediterranean and Black Sea, the North
Sea and the Baltic. The North Atlantic is connected with the Arctic
Basin by four main channels: (1) Hudson Strait, about 60 m. wide,
communicating with the gulfs and straits of the North American Arctic
archipelago; (2) Davis Strait, about 200 m. wide, leading to Baffin Bay;
(3) Denmark Strait, between Greenland and Iceland, 130 m. wide; and (4)
the "Norwegian Sea," about 400 m. wide, extending from Iceland to the
Faeroe Islands, the Shetland Islands and the coast of Norway. The width
of the North Atlantic in lat. 60°, approximately where it breaks up into
the branches just named, is nearly 2000 m.; in about lat. 50° N. the
coasts of Ireland and Newfoundland approach to 1750 m.; the breadth then
increases rapidly to lat. 40° N., and attains its maximum of 4500 m. in
lat. 25° N.; farther south the minimum breadth is reached between Africa
and South America, Cape Palmas being only 1600 m. distant from Cape St
Roque. In marked contrast to this, the South Atlantic is distinguished
by great simplicity of coast-line; inland seas there are none, and it
attains its greatest breadth as it merges with the Southern Ocean; in
lat. 35° S. the width is 3700 m.

The total area of the North Atlantic, not counting inland seas connected
with it, is, according to G. Karstens, 36,438,000 sq. kilometres, or
10,588,000 sq. m.; including the inland seas the area is 45,641,000 sq.
kilometres or 13,262,000 sq. m. The area of the South Atlantic is
43,455,000 sq. kilometres, or 12,627,000 sq. m. Although not the most
extensive of the great oceans, the Atlantic has by far the largest
drainage area. The "long slopes" of the continents on both sides are
directed towards the Atlantic, which accordingly receives the waters of
a large proportion of the great rivers of the world, including the St
Lawrence, the Mississippi, the Orinoco, the Amazon, the rivers of the La
Plata, the Congo, the Niger, the Loire, the Rhine, the Elbe and the
great rivers of the Mediterranean and the Baltic. Sir J. Murray
estimates the total area of land draining to the Atlantic to be
13,432,000 sq. m., or with the Arctic area nearly 20,000,000 sq. m.,
nearly four times the area draining to the Pacific Ocean, and almost
precisely four times the area draining to the Indian Ocean. Murray's
calculations give the amount of precipitation received on this area at
15,800 cub. m. annually, and the river discharge from it at 3900 cub. m.

  Relief of the bed.

The dominant feature of the relief of the Atlantic basin is a submarine
ridge running from north to south from about lat. 50° N. to lat. 40° S.,
almost exactly in the central line, and following the S-shape of the
coasts. Over this ridge the average depth is about 1700 fathoms. Towards
its northern end the ridge widens and rises to the plateau of the
Azores, and in about 50° N. lat. it merges with the "Telegraph Plateau,"
which extends across nearly the whole ocean from Ireland to
Newfoundland. North of the fiftieth parallel the depths diminish towards
the north-east, two long submarine ridges of volcanic origin extend
north-eastwards to the south-west of Iceland and to the Faeroe Islands,
and these, with their intervening valleys, end in a transverse ridge
connecting Greenland, through Iceland and the Faeroe Islands, with
North-western Scotland and the continental mass of Europe. The mean
depth over this ridge is about 250 fathoms, and the maximum depth
nowhere reaches 500 fathoms. The main basin of the Atlantic is thus cut
off from the Arctic basin, with which the area north of the ridge has
complete deep-water communication. This intermediate region, which has
Atlantic characteristics down to 300 fathoms, and at greater depths
belongs more properly to the Arctic Sea, commonly receives the name of
Norwegian Sea. On both sides of the central ridge deep troughs extend
southwards from the Telegraph plateau to the Southern Ocean, the deep
water coming close to the land all the way down on both sides. In these
troughs the depth is seldom much less than 3000 fathoms, and this is
exceeded in a series of patches to which Murray has given the name of
"Deeps." In the eastern trough the Peake Deep lies off the Bay of Biscay
in 20° W. long., Monaco Deep and Chun Deep off the north-west of Africa,
Moseley Deep off the Cape Verde Islands, Krech Deep off the Liberian
coast, and Buchanan Deep off the mouth of the Congo. The western trough
extends northwards into Davis Strait, forming a depression in the
Telegraph plateau; to the south of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia are
Sigsbee Deep, Libbey Deep and Suhm Deep, each of small area; north-east
of the Bahamas Nares Deep forms the largest and deepest depression in
the Atlantic, in which a sounding of 4561 fathoms was obtained (70 m.
north of Porto Rico) by the U.S. ship "Blake" in 1883. Immediately to
the south of Nares Deep lies the smaller Makarov Deep; and off the coast
of South America are Tizard Deep and Havergal Deep.

Before the Antarctic expeditions of 1903-1904 our knowledge of the form
of the sea bottom south of 40° S. lat. was almost wholly derived from
the soundings of the expedition of Sir J.C. Ross in the "Erebus" and
"Terror" (1839-1843), and the bathymetrical maps published were largely
the result of deductions based on one sounding taken by Ross in 68° 34'
S. lat., 12° 49' W. long., in which he recorded a depth exceeding 4000
fathoms. The Scottish Antarctic expedition has shown this sounding to be
erroneous; the "Scotia" obtained samples of bottom, in almost the same
spot, from a depth of 2660 fathoms. Combining the results of recent
soundings, Dr W.S. Bruce, the leader of the Scottish expedition, finds
that there is a ridge "extending in a curve from Madagascar to Bouvet
Island, and from Bouvet Island to the Sandwich group, whence there is a
forked connexion through the South Orkneys to Graham's Land, and through
South Georgia to the Falkland Islands and the South American continent."
Again, the central ridge of the South Atlantic extends a thousand miles
farther south than was supposed, joining the east and west ridge, just
described, between the Bouvet Islands and the Sandwich group.

The foundations of our knowledge of the relief of the Atlantic basin may
be said to have been laid by the work of H.M.S. "Challenger"
(1873-1876), and the German ship "Gazelle" (1874-1876), the French
expedition in the "Travailleur" (1880), and the U.S. surveying vessel
"Blake" (1877 and later). Large numbers of additional soundings have
been made in recent years by cable ships, by the expeditions of H.S.H.
the prince of Monaco, the German "Valdivia" expedition under Professor
Chun (1898), and the combined Antarctic expeditions (1903-1904).

  Islands.

The Atlantic Ocean contains a relatively small number of islands. The
only continental groups, besides some islands in the Mediterranean, are
Iceland, the British Isles, Newfoundland, the West Indies, and the
Falklands, and the chief oceanic islands are the Azores, Madeira, the
Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands, Ascension, St Helena, Tristan da Cunha
and Bouvet Island.

  Mean depth, and bottom deposits.

The mean depth of the North Atlantic is, according to G. Karstens, 2047
fathoms. If we include the enclosed seas, the North Atlantic has a mean
depth of 1800 fathoms. The South Atlantic has a mean depth of 2067
fathoms.

The greater part of the bottom of the Atlantic is covered by a deposit
of Globigerina ooze, roughly the area between 1000 and 3000 fathoms, or
about 60% of the whole. At a depth of about 3000 fathoms, i.e. in the
"Deeps," the Globigerina ooze gradually gives place to red clay. In the
shallower tropical waters, especially on the central ridge, considerable
areas are covered by Pteropod ooze, a deposit consisting largely of the
shells of pelagic molluscs. Diatom ooze is the characteristic deposit in
high southern latitudes. The terrigenous deposits consist of blue muds,
red muds (abundant along the coast of Brazil, where the amount of
organic matter present is insufficient to reduce the iron in the matter
brought down by the great rivers to produce blue muds), green muds and
sands, and volcanic and coral detritus.

The question of the origin of the Atlantic basin, like that of the other
great divisions of the hydrosphere, is still unsettled. Most geologists
include the Atlantic with the other oceans in the view they adopt as to
its age; but E. Suess and M. Neumayr, while they regard the basin of the
Pacific as of great antiquity, believe the Atlantic to date only from
the Mesozoic age. Neumayr finds evidence of the existence of a continent
between Africa and South America, which protruded into the central North
Atlantic, in Jurassic times. F. Kossmat has shown that the Atlantic had
substantially its present form during the Cretaceous period.

  Distribution of temperature.

In describing the mean distribution of temperature in the waters of the
Atlantic it is necessary to treat the northern and southern divisions
separately. The heat equator, or line of maximum mean surface
temperature, starts from the African coast in about 5° N. lat., and
closely follows that parallel to 40° W. long., where it bends northwards
to the Caribbean Sea. North of this line, near which the temperature is
a little over 80° F., the gradient trends somewhat to the east of north,
and the temperature is slightly higher on the western than on the
eastern side until, in 45° N. lat., the isothermal of 60° F. runs nearly
east and west. Beyond this parallel the gradient is directed towards the
north-west, and temperatures are much higher on the European than on the
American side. From the surface to 500 fathoms the general form of the
isothermals remains the same, except that instead of an equatorial
maximum belt there is a focus of maximum temperature off the eastern
coast of the United States. This focus occupies a larger area and
becomes of greater relative intensity as the depth increases until, at
500 fathoms, it becomes an elongated belt extending right across the
ocean in about 30° N. lat. Below 500 fathoms the western centres of
maximum disappear, and higher temperatures occur in the eastern Atlantic
off the Iberian peninsula and north-western Africa down to at least 1000
fathoms; at still greater depths temperature gradually becomes more and
more uniform. The communication between the Atlantic and Arctic basins
being cut off, as already described, at a depth of about 300 fathoms,
the temperatures in the Norwegian Sea below that level are essentially
Arctic, usually below the freezing-point of fresh water, except where
the distribution is modified by the surface circulation. The isothermals
of mean surface temperature in the South Atlantic are in the lower
latitudes of an ~-shape, temperatures being higher on the American than
on the African side. In latitudes south of 30° S. the curved form tends
to disappear, the lines running more and more directly east and west.
Below the surface a focus of maximum temperature appears off the coast
of South America in about 30° S. lat., and of minimum temperature north
and north-east of this maximum. This distribution is most marked at
about 300 fathoms, and disappears at 500 fathoms, beyond which depth the
lines tend to become parallel and to run east and west, the gradient
slowly diminishing.

  Salinity.

The Atlantic is by far the saltest of the great oceans. Its saltest
waters are found at the surface in two belts, one extending east and
west in the North Atlantic between 20° and 30° N. lat., and another of
almost equal salinity extending eastwards from the coast of South
America in 10° to 20° S. lat. In the equatorial region between these
belts the salinity is markedly less, especially in the eastern part.
North of the North Atlantic maximum the waters become steadily fresher
as latitude increases until the channels opening into the Arctic basin
are reached. In all of these water of relatively high salinity usually
appears for a long distance towards the north on the eastern side of the
channel, while on the western side the water is comparatively fresh; but
great variations occur at different seasons and in different years. In
the higher latitudes of the South Atlantic the salinity diminishes
steadily and tends to be uniform from east to west, except near the
southern extremity of South America, where the surface waters are very
fresh. Our knowledge of the salinity of waters below the surface is as
yet very defective, large areas being still unrepresented by a single
observation. The chief facts already established are the greater
saltness of the North Atlantic compared with the South Atlantic at all
depths, and the low salinity at all depths in the eastern equatorial
region, off the Gulf of Guinea.

  Meteorology.

The wind circulation over the Atlantic is of a very definite character.
In the South Atlantic the narrow land surfaces of Africa and South
America produce comparatively little effect in disturbing the normal
planetary circulation. The tropical belt of high atmospheric pressure is
very marked in winter; it is weaker during the summer months, and at
that season the greater relative fall of pressure over the land cuts it
off into an oval-shaped anticyclone, the centre of which rests on the
coolest part of the sea surface in that latitude, near the Gulf of
Guinea. South of this anticyclone, from about the latitude of the Cape,
we find the region where, on account of the uninterrupted sea surface
right round the globe, the planetary circulation is developed to the
greatest extent known; the pressure gradient is steep, and the region is
swept continuously by strong westerly winds--the "roaring forties."

In the North Atlantic the distribution of pressure and resulting wind
circulation are very largely modified by the enormous areas of land and
frozen sea which surround the ocean on three sides. The tropical belt of
high pressure persists all the year round, but the immense demand for
air to supply the ascending currents over the heated land surfaces in
summer causes the normal descending movement to be largely reinforced;
hence the "North Atlantic anticyclone" is much larger, and its
circulation more vigorous, in summer than in winter. Again, during the
winter months pressure is relatively high over North America, Western
Eurasia and the Arctic regions; hence vast quantities of air are brought
down to the surface, and circulation must be kept up by ascending
currents over the ocean. The Atlantic anticyclone is, therefore, at its
weakest in winter, and on its polar side the polar eddy becomes a trough
of low pressure, extending roughly from Labrador to Iceland and Jan
Mayen, and traversed by a constant succession of cyclones. The net
effect of the surrounding land is, in fact, to reverse the seasonal
variations of the planetary circulation, but without destroying its
type. In the intermediate belt between the two high-pressure areas the
meteorological equator remains permanently north of the geographical
equator, moving between it and about 11° N. lat.

  Currents.

The part of this atmospheric circulation which is steadiest in its
action is the trade winds, and this is, therefore, the most effective in
producing drift movement of the surface waters. The trade winds give
rise, in the region most exposed to their influence, to two
westward-moving drifts--the equatorial currents, which are separated in
parts of their course by currents moving in the opposite direction along
the equatorial belt. These last may be of the nature of "reaction"
currents; they are collectively known as the equatorial counter-current.
On reaching the South American coast, the southern equatorial current
splits into two parts at Cape St Roque: one branch, the Brazil current,
is deflected southwards and follows the coast as a true stream current
at least as far as the river Plate. The second branch proceeds
north-westwards towards the West Indies, where it mingles with the
waters of the northern equatorial; and the two drifts, blocked by the
<-shape of the land, raise the level of the surface in the Gulf of
Mexico, the Caribbean Sea, and in the whole area outside the West
Indies. This congestion is relieved by what is probably the most rapid
and most voluminous stream current in the world, the Gulf Stream, which
runs along the coast of North America, separated from it by a narrow
strip of cold water, the "cold wall," to a point off the south-east of
Newfoundland. At this point the Gulf Stream water mixes with that from
the Labrador current (see below), and a drift current eastwards is set
up under the influence of the prevailing westerly winds: this is
generally called the Gulf Stream drift. When the Gulf Stream drift
approaches the eastern side of the Atlantic it splits into two parts,
one going southwards along the north-west coast of Africa, the Canaries
current, and another turning northwards and passing to the west of the
British Isles. Most of the Canaries current re-enters the northern
equatorial, but a certain proportion keeps to the African coast, unites
with the equatorial return currents, and penetrates into the Gulf of
Guinea. This last feature of the circulation is still somewhat obscure;
it is probably to be accounted for by the fact that on this part of the
coast the prevailing winds, although to a considerable extent monsoonal,
are off-shore winds, blowing the surface waters out to sea, and the
place of the water thus removed is filled up by the water derived either
from lower levels or from "reaction" currents.

The movements of the northern branch of the Gulf Stream drift have been
the object of more careful and more extended study than all the other
currents of the ocean put together, except, perhaps, the Gulf Stream
itself. The cruises of the "Porcupine" and "Lightning" which led
directly to the despatch of the "Challenger" expedition, were altogether
within its "sphere of influence"; so also was the great Norwegian
Atlantic expedition. More recently, the area has been further explored
by the German expedition in the ss. "National," the Danish "Ingolf"
expedition, and the minor expeditions of the "Michael Sars," "Jackal,"
"Research," &c., and since 1902 it has been periodically examined by the
International Council for the Study of the Sea. Much has also been done
by the discussion of observations made on board vessels belonging to the
mercantile marine of various countries. It may now be taken as generally
admitted that the current referred to breaks into three main branches.
The first passes northwards, most of it between the Faeroe and Shetland
Islands, to the coast of Norway, and so on to the Arctic basin, which,
as Nansen has shown, it fills to a great depth. The second, the Irminger
stream, passes up the west side of Iceland; and the third goes up to the
Greenland side of Davis Strait to Baffin Bay. These branches are
separated from one another at the surface by currents moving southwards:
one passes east of Iceland; the second, the Greenland current, skirts
the east coast of Greenland; and the third, the Labrador current already
mentioned, follows the western side of Davis Strait.

The development of the equatorial and the Brazil currents in the South
Atlantic has already been described. On the polar side of the
high-pressure area a west wind drift is under the control of the
"roaring forties," and on reaching South Africa part of this is
deflected and sent northwards along the west coast as the cold Benguella
current which rejoins the equatorial. In the central parts of the two
high-pressure areas there is practically no surface circulation. In the
North Atlantic this region is covered by enormous banks of gulf-weed
(_Sargassum bucciferum_), hence the name Sargasso Sea. The Sargasso Sea
is bounded, roughly, by the lines of 20°-35° N. lat. and 40°-75° W.
long.

The sub-surface circulation in the Atlantic may be regarded as
consisting of two parts. Where surface water is banked up against the
land, as by the equatorial and Gulf Stream drift currents, it appears to
penetrate to very considerable depths; the escaping stream currents are
at first of great vertical thickness and part of the water at their
sources has a downward movement. In the case of the Gulf Stream, which
is not much impeded by the land, this descending motion is relatively
slight, being perhaps largely due to the greater specific gravity of the
water; it ceases to be perceptible beyond about 500 fathoms. On the
European-African side the descending movement is more marked, partly
because the coast-line is much more irregular and the northward current
is deflected against it by the earth's rotation, and partly because of
the outflow of salt water from the Mediterranean; here the movement is
traceable to at least 1000 fathoms. The northward movement of water
across the Norwegian Sea extends down from the surface to the
Iceland-Shetland ridge, where it is sharply cut off; the lower levels of
the Norwegian Sea are filled with ice-cold Arctic water, close down to
the ridge. The south-moving currents originating from melting ice are
probably quite shallow. The second part of the circulation in the depth
is the slow "creep" of water of very low temperature along the bottom.
The North Atlantic being altogether cut off from the Arctic regions, and
the vertical circulation being active, this movement is here practically
non-existent; but in the South Atlantic, where communication with the
Southern Ocean is perfectly open, Antarctic water can be traced to the
equator and even beyond.

The tides of the Atlantic Ocean are of great complexity. The tidal wave
of the Southern Ocean, which sweeps uninterruptedly round the globe from
the east to west, generates a secondary wave between Africa and South
America, which travels north at a rate dependent only on the depth of
the ocean. With this "free" wave is combined a "forced" wave, generated,
by the direct action of the sun and moon, within the Atlantic area
itself. Nothing is known about the relative importance of these two
waves.     (H. N. D.)

  See also OCEANS AND OCEANOGRAPHY.