ATLANTIS, ATLANTIS, or ATLANTICA, a legendary island in the Atlantic
Ocean, first mentioned by Plato in the _Timaeus_. Plato describes how
certain Egyptian priests, in a conversation with Solon, represented the
island as a country larger than Asia Minor and Libya united, and
situated just beyond the Pillars of Hercules (Straits of Gibraltar).
Beyond it lay an archipelago of lesser islands. According to the
priests, Atlantis had been a powerful kingdom nine thousand years before
the birth of Solon, and its armies had overrun the lands which bordered
the Mediterranean. Athens alone had withstood them with success. Finally
the sea had overwhelmed Atlantis, and had thenceforward become
unnavigable owing to the shoals which marked the spot. In the _Critias_
Plato adds a history of the ideal commonwealth of Atlantis. It is
impossible to decide how far this legend is due to Plato's invention,
and how far it is based on facts of which no record remains. Medieval
writers, for whom the tale was preserved by the Arabian geographers,
believed it true, and were fortified in their belief by numerous
traditions of islands in the western sea, which offered various points
of resemblance to Atlantis. Such in particular were the Greek Isles of
the Blest, or Fortunate Islands, the Welsh Avalon, the Portuguese
Antilia or Isle of Seven Cities, and St Brendan's island, the subject of
many sagas in many languages. These, which are described in separate
articles, helped to maintain the tradition of an earthly paradise which
had become associated with the myth of Atlantis; and all except Avalon
were marked in maps of the 14th and 15th centuries, and formed the
object of voyages of discovery, in one case (St Brendan's island) until
the 18th century. In early legends, of whatever nationality, they are
almost invariably described in terms which closely resemble Homer's
account of the island of the Phaeacians (_Od._ viii.)--a fact which may
be an indication of their common origin in some folk-tale current among
several races. Somewhat similar legends are those of the island of
Brazil (q.v.), of Lyonnesse (q.v.), the sunken land off the Cornish
coast, of the lost Breton city of Is, and of Mayda or Asmaide--the
French _Isle Verte_ and Portuguese _Ilha Verde_ or "Green Island"--which
appears in many folk-tales from Gibraltar to the Hebrides, and until
1853 was marked on English charts as a rock in 44° 48' N. and 26° 10' W.
After the Renaissance, with its renewal of interest in Platonic studies,
numerous attempts were made to rationalize the myth of Atlantis. The
island was variously identified with America, Scandinavia, the Canaries
and even Palestine; ethnologists saw in its inhabitants the ancestors of
the Guanchos, the Basques or the ancient Italians; and even in the 17th
and 18th centuries the credibility of the whole legend was seriously
debated, and sometimes admitted, even by Montaigne, Buffon and Voltaire.

  For the theory that Atlantis is to be identified with Crete in the
  Minoan period, see "The Lost Continent" in _The Times_ (London) for
  the 19th of February 1909. See also "Dissertation sur l'Atlantide" in
  T.H. Martin's _Études sur le Timée_ (1841).