ATROPHY (Gr. [Greek: a]- priv., [Greek: trophae], nourishment), a term
in medicine used to describe a state of wasting due to some interference
with the function of healthy nutrition (see PATHOLOGY). In the living
organism there are always at work changes involving the waste of its
component tissues, which render necessary, in order to maintain and
preserve life, the supply and proper assimilation of nutritive material.
It is also essential for the maintenance of health that a due relation
exist between these processes of waste and repair, so that the one may
not be in excess of the other. When the appropriation of nutriment
exceeds the waste, hypertrophy (q.v.) or increase in bulk of the tissues
takes place. When, on the other hand, the supply of nutritive matter is
suspended or diminished, or when the power of assimilation is impaired,
atrophy or wasting is the result. Thus the whole body becomes atrophied
in many diseases; and in old age every part of the frame, with the
single exception of the heart, undergoes atrophic change. Atrophy may,
however, affect single organs or parts of the body, irrespective of the
general state of nutrition, and this may be brought about in a variety
of ways. One of the most frequently observed of such instances is
atrophy from disuse, or cessation of function. Thus, when a limb is
deprived of the natural power of motion, either by paralysis or by
painful joint disease, the condition of exercise essential to its
nutrition being no longer fulfilled, atrophy of all its textures sooner
or later takes place. The brain in imbeciles is frequently observed to
be shrivelled, and in many cases of blindness there is atrophy of the
optic nerve and optic tract. This form of atrophy is likewise well
exemplified in the case of those organs and structures of the body which
subserve important ends during foetal life, but which, ceasing to be
necessary after birth, undergo a sort of natural atrophy, such as the
thymus gland, and certain vessels specially concerned in the foetal
circulation. The uterus after parturition undergoes a certain amount of
atrophy, and the ovaries, after the child-bearing period, become
shrunken. Atrophy of a part may also be caused by interruption to its
normal blood-supply, as in the case of the ligature or obstruction of an
artery. Again, long-standing disease, by affecting the nutrition of an
organ and by inducing the deposit of morbid products, may result in
atrophy, as frequently happens in affections of the liver and kidneys.
Parts that are subjected to continuous pressure are liable to become
atrophied, as is sometimes seen in internal organs which have been
pressed upon by tumours or other morbid growths, and is well illustrated
in the Chinese practice of foot-binding. Atrophy may manifest itself
simply by loss of substance; but, on the other hand, it is often found
to co-exist with degenerative changes in the textures affected and the
formation of adventitious growth, so that the part may not be reduced in
bulk although atrophied as regards its proper structure. Thus, in the
case of the heart, when affected with fatty degeneration, there is
atrophy of the proper muscular texture, but as this is largely replaced
by fatty matter, the organ may undergo no diminution in volume, but may,
on the contrary, be increased in size. Atrophy is usually a gradual and
slow process, but sometimes it proceeds rapidly. In the disease known by
the name of _acute yellow atrophy of the liver_, that organ undergoes
such rapidly destructive change as results in its shrinking to half, or
one-third, of its normal size in the course of a few days. The term
_progressive muscular atrophy_ (synonyms, _wasting_ or _creeping palsy_)
is applied to an affection of the muscular system, which is
characterized by the atrophy and subsequent paralysis of certain
muscles, or groups of muscles, and is associated with morbid changes in
the anterior roots of the nerves of the spinal cord. This disease begins
insidiously, and is often first observed to affect the muscles of one
hand, generally the right. The attention of the sufferer is first
attracted by the power of the hand becoming weakened, and then there is
found to be a wasting of certain of its muscles, particularly those of
the ball of the thumb. Gradually other muscles in the arms and legs
become affected in a similar manner, their atrophy being attended with a
corresponding diminution in power. Although sometimes arrested, this
disease tends to progress, until in course of time the greater part of
the muscular system is implicated and a fatal result ensues.