ATTAINDER (from the O. Fr. _ataindre, ateindre_, to attain, i.e. to
strike, accuse, condemn; Lat. _attingere, tangere_, to touch; the
meaning has been greatly affected by the confusion with Fr. _taindre,
teindre_, to taint, stain, Lat. _tingere_, to dye), in English law, was
the immediate and inseparable consequence from the common law upon the
sentence of death. When it was clear beyond all dispute that the
criminal was no longer fit to live he was called _attaint_, and could
not, before the Evidence Act 1843, be a witness in any court. This
attainder took place after judgment of death, or upon such circumstances
as were equivalent to judgment of death, such as judgment of outlawry on
a capital crime, pronounced for absconding from justice. Conviction
without judgment was not followed by attainder. The consequences of
attainder were (1) forfeiture, (2) corruption of blood. On attainder for
treason, the criminal forfeited to the crown his lands, rights of entry
on lands, and any interest he might have in lands for his own life or a
term of years. For murder, the offender forfeited to the crown the
profit of his freeholds during life, and in the case of lands held in
fee-simple, the lands themselves for a year and a day; subject to this,
the lands escheated to the lord of the fee. These forfeitures related
back to the time of the offence committed. Forfeitures of goods and
chattels ensued not only on attainder, but on conviction for a felony of
any kind, or on flight from justice, and had no relation backwards to
the time of the offence committed. By _corruption of blood_, "both
upwards and downwards," the attainted person could neither inherit nor
transmit lands. The lands escheated to the lord of the fee, subject to
the crown's right of forfeiture. The doctrine of attainder has, however,
ceased to be of much importance. The Forfeiture Act 1870 enacted that
henceforth no confession, verdict, inquest, conviction or judgment of or
for any treason or felony, or _felo de se_, should cause any attainder
or corruption of blood, or any forfeiture or escheat. Sentence of death,
penal servitude or imprisonment with hard labour for more than twelve
months, after conviction for treason or felony, disqualifies from
holding or retaining a seat in parliament, public offices under the
crown or otherwise, right to vote at elections, &c., and such disability
is to remain until the punishment has been suffered or a pardon
obtained. Provision was made for the due administration of convicts'
estates, in the interests of themselves and their families. Forfeiture
consequent on outlawry was exempted from the provisions of the act. The
United States constitution (Art. III. s. 3) says: "The Congress shall
have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no attainder of
treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture except during the
life of the person attainted."

_Bills of Attainder_, in English legal procedure, were formerly a
parliamentary method of exercising judicial authority. They were
ordinarily initiated in the House of Lords and the proceedings were the
same as on other bills, but the parties against whom they were brought
might appear by counsel and produce witnesses in both Houses. In the
case of an impeachment (q.v.), the House of Commons was prosecutor and
the House of Lords judge; but such bills being _legislative_ in form,
the consent of crown, lords and commons was necessary to pass them.
Bishops, who do not exercise but who claim the right to vote in cases of
impeachment (q.v.), have a right to vote upon bills of attainder, but
their vote is not conclusive in passing judgment upon the accused. First
passed in 1459, such bills were employed, more particularly during the
reigns of the Tudor kings, as a species of extrajudicial procedure, for
the direct punishment of political offences. Dispensing with the
ordinary judicial forms and precedents, they took away from the accused
whatever advantages he might have gained in the courts of law; such
evidence only was admitted as might be necessary to secure conviction;
indeed, in many cases bills of attainder were passed without any
evidence being produced at all. In the reign of Henry VIII. they were
much used, through a subservient parliament, to punish those who had
incurred the king's displeasure; many distinguished victims who could
not have been charged with any offence under the existing laws being by
this means disposed of. In the 17th century, during the disputes with
Charles I., the Long Parliament made effective use of the same
procedure, forcing the sovereign to give his consent. After the
Restoration it became less frequent, though the Jacobite movement in
Scotland produced several instances of attainder, without, however, the
infliction of the extreme penalty of death. The last bill of attainder
passed in England was in the case of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, one of the
Irish rebel leaders of 1798.

A bill for reversing attainder took a form contrary to the usual rule.
It was first signed by the sovereign and presented by a peer to the
House of Lords by command of the crown, then passed through the ordinary
stages and on to the commons, to whom the sovereign's assent was
communicated before the first reading was taken, otherwise the whole
proceedings were null and void.

A _Bill of Pains and Penalties_ resembles a bill of attainder in object
and procedure, but imposes a lesser punishment than death. The most
notable instances of the passing of a bill of pains and penalties are
those of Bishop Atterbury in 1722, and of Queen Caroline, wife of George
IV., in 1820.

The constitution of the United States declares that "no bill of
attainder or _ex post facto_ law shall be passed."