ATTACHMENT,[1] in law, a process from a court of record, awarded by the
justices at their discretion, on a bare suggestion, or on their own
knowledge, and properly grantable in cases of contempt. It differs from
arrest (q.v.), in that he who arrests a man carries him to a person of
higher power to be forthwith disposed of; but he that attaches keeps the
party attached, and presents him in court at the day assigned, as
appears by the words of the writ. Another difference is, that arrest is
only upon the body of a man, whereas an attachment is often upon his
goods. It is distinguished from distress in not extending to lands, as
the latter does; nor does a distress touch the body, as an attachment
does. Every court of record has power to fine and imprison for contempt
of its authority. Attachment being merely a process to bring the
defendant before the court, is not necessary in cases of contempt in the
presence of the court itself. Attachment will be granted in England
against peers and members of parliament only for such gross contempts as
rescues, disobedience to the sovereign's writs and the like. Attachment
will not lie against a corporation. The county courts in this respect
are regulated by acts of 1846 and 1849. They can only punish for
contempts committed in presence of the court (see CONTEMPT OF COURT).
Attachments are granted on a rule in the first instance to show cause,
which must be personally served before it can be made absolute, except
for non-payment of costs on a master's allocatur, and against a sheriff
for not obeying a rule to return a writ or to bring in the body. The
offender is then arrested, and when committed will be compelled to
answer interrogatories, exhibited against him by the party at whose
instance the proceedings have been had; and the examination when taken
is referred to the master, who reports thereon, and on the contempt
being reported, the court gives judgment according to its discretion, in
the same manner as upon a conviction for a misdemeanour at common law.
Sir W. Blackstone observes that "this method of making the defendant
answer upon oath to a criminal charge is not agreeable to the genius of
the common law in any other instance"; and the elasticity of the legal
definitions of contempt of court, especially with respect to comments on
judicial proceedings, is the subject of much complaint.

_Attachment of Debts._--It was suggested by the common law commissioners
in 1853 that a remedy analogous to that of Foreign Attachment (see
below) might be made available to creditors, after judgment, against
debts due to their debtors. Accordingly, the Common Law Procedure Act
1854 enacted that any creditor, having obtained judgment in the superior
courts, should have an order that the judgment debtor might be examined
as to any debts due and owing to him before a master of the court. The
rules and regulations under the Judicature Act 1873 retained the process
for attachment of debts as established by the Procedure Act of 1854. On
affidavit that the judgment was still unsatisfied, and that any other
person within the jurisdiction was indebted to the judgment debtor, the
judge was empowered to attach all debts due from such third person
(called the _garnishee_) to the judgment debtor, to answer the judgment
debt. This order binds the debts in the hands of the garnishee, and if
he does not dispute his liability execution issues against him at once.
If he disputes his liability the question must be tried. Payment by the
garnishee or execution against him is a complete discharge as against
the judgment debtor. These provisions were, by an order in council of
the 18th of November 1867, extended to the county courts. By the Wages
Attachment Abolition Act 1870 it is enacted that no order for the
attachment of the wages of any servant, labourer or workman shall be
made by the judge of any court of record or inferior court, and by the
Merchant Shipping Act 1894 it is enacted that the wages of a seaman or
apprentice are not subject to attachment.

In the United States attachment of debts is a statutory remedy accorded
in most of the states in certain circumstances for the security of
creditors, by the seizure by the sheriff of the debtor's goods or the
imposition of a lien upon his land, before judgment, and sometimes at
the very commencement of the action. In some states it is only allowed
in special cases, as when the debtor has absconded, or is a non-resident
or guilty of fraud; in a few it may be had, as of right, at the
commencement of ordinary actions. The common-law courts of the United
States (by act of Congress) follow the practice in this regard of the
state in which they sit. Such attachments (on mesne process) can
generally be dissolved by the substitution of a bond with surety. The
body can also be attached in most states on civil actions of tort (for a
wrongful or negligent act to the damage of another), but not in actions
on contract.

_Foreign Attachment_ is an important custom prevailing in the city of
London, whereby a creditor may attach money owing to his debtor, or
property belonging to him in the possession of third parties. The person
holding the property or owing the money must be within the city at the
time of being served with the process, but all persons are entitled to
the benefit of the custom. The plaintiff having commenced his action,
and made a satisfactory affidavit of his debt, is entitled to issue
attachment, which thereupon affects all the money or property of the
defendant in the hands of the third party, the garnishee. The garnishee,
of course, has as against the attachment all the defences which would be
available to him against the defendant, his alleged creditor. The
garnishee may plead payment under the attachment, if there has been no
fraud or collusion, in bar to an action by the defendant for his debt or
property. The court to which this process belongs is the mayor's court
of London, the procedure in which is regulated by the Mayor's Court of
London Procedure Act 1857. This custom, and all proceedings relating
thereto, are expressly exempted from the operation of the Debtor's Act
1869. Similar customs exist in Bristol and a few other towns in England
and also in Scotland.

_A Writ of Attachment_ enforces answers and obedience to decrees and
orders of the High Court of Justice, and is made out without order upon
an affidavit of the due service of the process, &c., with whose
requirements compliance is sought. A corporation, however, is proceeded
against by distringas and not by attachment. It was formerly competent
to the plaintiff to compel the appearance of a defendant in chancery by
attachment, but the usual course was to enter appearance for him in case
of default. It is one of the modes of execution allowed for the recovery
of property other than land or money.

_Attachment of the Forest_ was the proceeding in the courts of
attachments, Woodmote, or Forty Days' courts. These courts have fallen
into desuetude. They were held before the verderers of the royal forests
in different parts of the kingdom once in every forty days, for the
purpose of inquiring into all offences against "vert (greensward) and
venison." The attachment was by the bodies of the offenders, if taken in
the very act of killing venison, or stealing wood, or preparing so to
do, or by fresh and immediate pursuit after the act was done; else they
must be attached by their goods. These attachments were received by the
verderers and enrolled, and certified under their seals to the
Swainmote, or Court of Justice-seat, which was the superior of the
forest courts.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] "To attach" is first used in English in the legal sense of arrest
    or seizure, and the sense of "fasten to" is comparatively late. The
    Old French _atachier_, modern _attacher_, from which the English
    "attach" is derived, is from a word for a peg or nail, in English
    "tack," which is found in many forms in Scandinavian and Celtic
    languages, and is ultimately connected with the root seen in Latin
    _tangere_, to touch. The Italian _attacare_, especially in the phrase
    _attacare battaglia_, to join battle, gave the French _attaquer_,
    whence the English "attack," which is therefore by origin a doublet
    of "attach."