ATTERBURY, FRANCIS (1662-1732), English man of letters, politician and
bishop, was born in the year 1662, at Milton or Middleton Keynes in
Buckinghamshire, a parish of which his father was rector. He was
educated at Westminster school and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he
became a tutor. In 1682 he published a translation of _Absalom and
Ahithophel_ into Latin verse; but neither the style nor the
versification was that of the Augustan age. In English composition he
succeeded much better. In 1687 he published _An Answer to some
Considerations on the Spirit of Martin Luther and the Original of the
Reformation_, a reply to Obadiah Walker, who, elected master of
University College in 1676, had printed in a press set up by him there
an attack on the Reformation, written by Abraham Woodhead. Atterbury's
treatise, though highly praised by Bishop Burnet, is perhaps more
distinguished for the vigour of his rhetoric than for the soundness of
his arguments, and the Papists were so much galled by his sarcasms and
invectives that they accused him of treason, and of having, by
implication, called King James a Judas.

After the Revolution, Atterbury, though bred in the doctrines of
non-resistance and passive obedience, readily swore fealty to the new
government. He had taken holy orders in 1687, preached occasionally in
London with an eloquence which raised his reputation, and was soon
appointed one of the royal chaplains. But he ordinarily resided at
Oxford, where he was the chief adviser and assistant of Dean Aldrich,
under whom Christ Church was a stronghold of Toryism. Thus he became the
inspirer of his pupil, Charles Boyle, in the attack (1698) on the Whig
scholar, Richard Bentley (q.v.), arising out of Bentley's impugnment of
the genuineness of the _Epistles of Phalaris_. He was figured by Swift
in the _Battle of the Books_ as the Apollo who directed the fight, and
was, no doubt, largely the author of Boyle's essay. Bentley spent two
years in preparing his famous reply, which proved not only that the
letters ascribed to Phalaris were spurious, but that all Atterbury's
wit, eloquence and skill in controversial fence was only a cloak for an
audacious pretence of scholarship.

Atterbury was soon occupied, however, in a dispute about matters still
more important and exciting. The rage of religious factions was extreme.
High Church and Low Church divided the nation. The great majority of the
clergy were on the High Church side; the majority of King William's
bishops were inclined to latitudinarianism. In 1700 Convocation, of
which the lower house was overwhelmingly Tory, had not been suffered to
meet for ten years. This produced a lively controversy, into which
Atterbury threw himself with characteristic energy, publishing a series
of treatises written with much wit, audacity and acrimony. By the mass
of the clergy he was regarded as the most intrepid champion that had
ever defended their rights against the oligarchy of Erastian prelates.
In 1701 he was rewarded with the archdeaconry of Totnes and a prebend in
Exeter cathedral. The lower house of Convocation voted him thanks for
his services; the university of Oxford created him a doctor of divinity;
and in 1704, soon after the accession of Anne, while the Tories still
had the chief weight in the government, he was promoted to the deanery
of Carlisle.

Soon after he had obtained this preferment the Whig party came into
power. From that party he could expect no favour. Six years elapsed
before a change of fortune took place. At length, in the year 1710, the
prosecution of Sacheverell produced a formidable explosion of High
Church fanaticism. At such a moment Atterbury could not fail to be
conspicuous. His inordinate zeal for the body to which he belonged, his
turbulent and aspiring temper, his rare talents for agitation and for
controversy, were again signally displayed. He bore a chief part in
framing that artful and eloquent speech which the accused divine
pronounced at the bar of the Lords, and which presents a singular
contrast to the absurd and scurrilous sermon which had very unwisely
been honoured with impeachment. During the troubled and anxious months
which followed the trial, Atterbury was among the most active of those
pamphleteers who inflamed the nation against the Whig ministry and the
Whig parliament. When the ministry had been changed and the parliament
dissolved, rewards were showered upon him. The lower house of
Convocation elected him prolocutor, in which capacity he drew up, in
1711, the often-cited _Representation of the State of Religion_; and, in
August 1711, the queen, who had selected him as her chief adviser in
ecclesiastical matters, appointed him dean of Christ Church on the death
of his old friend and patron Aldrich.

At Oxford he was as conspicuous a failure as he had been at Carlisle,
and it was said by his enemies that he was made a bishop because he was
so bad a dean. Under his administration Christ Church was in confusion,
scandalous altercations took place, and there was reason to fear that
the great Tory college would be ruined by the tyranny of the great Tory
doctor. In 1713 he was removed to the bishopric of Rochester, which was
then always united with the deanery of Westminster. Still higher
dignities seemed to be before him. For, though there were many able men
on the episcopal bench, there was none who equalled or approached him in
parliamentary talents. Had his party continued in power it is not
improbable that he would have been raised to the archbishopric of
Canterbury. The more splendid his prospects the more reason he had to
dread the accession of a family which was well known to be partial to
the Whigs, and there is every reason to believe that he was one of those
politicians who hoped that they might be able, during the life of Anne,
to prepare matters in such a way that at her decease there might be
little difficulty in setting aside the Act of Settlement and placing the
Pretender on the throne. Her sudden death confounded the projects of
these conspirators, and, whatever Atterbury's previous views may have
been, he acquiesced in what he could not prevent, took the oaths to the
house of Hanover, and did his best to ingratiate himself with the royal
family. But his servility was requited with cold contempt; and he became
the most factious and pertinacious of all the opponents of the
government. In the House of Lords his oratory, lucid, pointed, lively
and set off with every grace of pronunciation and of gesture, extorted
the attention and admiration even of a hostile majority. Some of the
most remarkable protests which appear in the journals of the peers were
drawn up by him; and, in some of the bitterest of those pamphlets which
called on the English to stand up for their country against the aliens
who had come from beyond the seas to oppress and plunder her, critics
easily detected his style. When the rebellion of 1715 broke out, he
refused to sign the paper in which the bishops of the province of
Canterbury declared their attachment to the Protestant succession, and
in 1717, after having been long in indirect communication with the
exiled family, he began to correspond directly with the Pretender.

In 1721, on the discovery of the plot for the capture of the royal
family and the proclamation of King James, Atterbury was arrested with
the other chief malcontents, and in 1722 committed to the Tower, where
he remained in close confinement during some months. He had carried on
his correspondence with the exiled family so cautiously that the
circumstantial proofs of his guilt, though sufficient to produce entire
moral conviction, were not sufficient to justify legal conviction. He
could be reached only by a bill of pains and penalties. Such a bill the
Whig party, then decidedly predominant in both Houses, was quite
prepared to support, and in due course a bill passed the Commons
depriving him of his spiritual dignities, banishing him for life, and
forbidding any British subject to hold intercourse with him except by
the royal permission. In the Lords the contest was sharp, but the bill
finally passed by eighty-three votes to forty-three.

Atterbury took leave of those whom he loved with a dignity and
tenderness worthy of a better man, to the last protesting his innocence
with a singular disingenuousness. After a short stay at Brussels he went
to Paris, and became the leading man among the Jacobite refugees there.
He was invited to Rome by the Pretender, but Atterbury felt that a
bishop of the Church of England would be out of place at the Vatican,
and declined the invitation. During some months, however, he seemed to
stand high in the good graces of James. The correspondence between the
master and the servant was constant. Atterbury's merits were warmly
acknowledged, his advice was respectfully received, and he was, as
Bolingbroke had been before him, the prime minister of a king without a
kingdom. He soon, however, perceived that his counsels were disregarded,
if not distrusted. His proud spirit was deeply wounded. In 1728 he
quitted Paris, fixed his residence at Montpelier, gave up politics, and
devoted himself entirely to letters. In the sixth year of his exile he
had so severe an illness that his daughter, Mrs Morice, herself very
ill, determined to run all risks that she might see him once more. She
met him at Toulouse, received the communion from his hand, and died that
night.

Atterbury survived the severe shock of his daughter's death two years.
He even returned to Paris and to the service of the Pretender, who had
found out that he had not acted wisely in parting with one who, though a
heretic, was the most able man of the Jacobite party. In the ninth year
of his banishment he published a luminous, temperate and dignified
vindication of himself against John Oldmixon, who had accused him of
having, in concert with other Christ Church men, garbled the new edition
of Clarendon's _History of the Rebellion_. The charge, as respected
Atterbury, had not the slightest foundation; for he was not one of the
editors of the _History_, and never saw it till it was printed. A copy
of this little work he sent to the Pretender, with a letter singularly
eloquent and graceful. It was impossible, the old man said, that he
should write anything on such a subject without being reminded of the
resemblance between his own fate and that of Clarendon. They were the
only two English subjects who had ever been banished from their country
and debarred from all communication with their friends by act of
parliament. But here the resemblance ended. One of the exiles had been
so happy as to bear a chief part in the restoration of the royal house.
All that the other could now do was to die asserting the rights of that
house to the last. A few weeks after this letter was written Atterbury
died, on the 22nd of February 1732. His body was brought to England, and
laid, with great privacy, under the nave of Westminster Abbey. No
inscription marks his grave.

It is agreeable to turn from Atterbury's public to his private life. His
turbulent spirit, wearied with faction and treason, now and then
required repose, and found it in domestic endearments, and in the
society of the most illustrious literary men of his time. Of his wife,
Katherine Osborn, whom he married while at Oxford, little is known; but
between him and his daughter there was an affection singularly close and
tender. The gentleness of his manners when he was in the company of a
few friends was such as seemed hardly credible to those who knew him
only by his writings and speeches. Though Atterbury's classical
attainments were not great, his taste in English literature was
excellent; and his admiration of genius was so strong that it
overpowered even his political and religious antipathies. His fondness
for Milton, the mortal enemy of the Stuarts and of the Church, was such
as to many Tories seemed a crime; and he was the close friend of
Addison. His favourite companions, however, were, as might have been
expected, men whose politics had at least a tinge of Toryism. He lived
on friendly terms with Swift, Arbuthnot and Gay. With Prior he had a
close intimacy, which some misunderstanding about public affairs at
last dissolved. Pope found in Atterbury not only a warm admirer, but a
most faithful, fearless and judicious adviser.

  See F. Williams, _Memoirs and Correspondence of Atterbury with Notes_,
  &c. (1869); _Stuart Papers_, vol. i.: _Letters of Atterbury to the
  Chevalier St George_, &c. (1847); J. Nichols, _Epistolary
  Correspondence_, &c. (1783-1796); and H.C. Beeching, _Francis
  Atterbury_, (1909).