ATTENTION (from Lat. _ad-tendo_, await, expect; the condition of being
"stretched" or "tense"), in psychology, the concentration of
consciousness upon a definite object or objects. The result is brought
about, not by effecting any change in the perceptions themselves, but
simply by isolating them from other objects. Since all consciousness
involves this isolation, attention may be defined generally as the
necessary condition of consciousness. Such a definition, however, throws
no light upon the nature of the psychological process, which is partly
explained by the general law that the greater the number of objects on
which attention is concentrated the less will each receive ("pluribus
intentus, minor est ad singula sensus"), and conversely. There are also
special circumstances which determine the amount of attention, e.g.
influences not subject to the will, such as the vividness of the
impression (e.g. in the case of a shock), strong change in pleasurable
or painful sensations. Secondly, an exercise of volition is employed in
fixing the mind upon a definite object. This is a purely voluntary act,
which can be strengthened by habit and is variable in different
individuals; to it the name "attention" is sometimes restricted. The
distinction is expressed by the words "reflex" or "passive," and
"volitional" or "active." It is important to notice that in every case
of attention to an object, there must be in consciousness an implicit
apprehension of surrounding objects from which the particular object is
isolated. These objects are known as the "psychic fringe," and are
essential to the systematic unity of the attention-process. Attempts
have been made to examine the attention-process from the physiological
standpoint by investigating the muscular and neural changes which
accompany it, and even to assign to it a specific local centre. It has,
for example, been remarked that uniformity of environment, resulting in
practically automatic activity, produces mental equilibrium and the
comparative disappearance of attention-processes; whereas the necessity
of adapting activity to abnormal conditions produces a comparatively
high degree of attention. In other words, attention is absent where
there is uniformity of activity in accordance with uniform, or uniformly
changing, environment. In spite of the progress made in this branch of
study, it has to be remembered that all psycho-physical experiments are
to some extent vitiated by the fact that the phenomena can scarcely
remain normal under inspection.

  See G.F. Stout, _Analytic Psychology_ (London, 1896), especially part
  ii. chap. 2; also PSYCHOLOGY, BRAIN, &c.