ATTIS, or ATYS, a deity worshipped in Phrygia, and later throughout the
Roman empire, in conjunction with the Great Mother of the Gods. Like
Aphrodite and Adonis in Syria, Baal and Astarte at Sidon, and Isis and
Osiris in Egypt, the Great Mother and Attis formed a duality which
symbolized the relations between Mother Earth and her fruitage. Their
worship included the celebration of mysteries annually on the return of
the spring season. Attis was also known as Papas, and the Bithynians and
Phrygians, according to evidence of the time of the late Empire, called
him Zeus. He was never worshipped independently, however, though the
worship of the Great Mother was not always accompanied by his. He was
confused with Pan, Sabazios, Men and Adonis, and there were resemblances
between the orgiastic features of his worship and that of Dionysus. His
resemblance to Adonis has led to the theory that the names of the two
are identical, and that Attis is only the Semitic companion of Syrian
Aphrodite grafted on to the Phrygian Great Mother worship (Haakh,
_Stuttgarter-Philolog.-Vers._, 1857, 176 ff.). It is likely, however,
that Attis, like the Great Mother, was indigenous to Asia Minor, adopted
by the invading Phrygians, and blended by them with a deity of their
own.

_Legends._--According to Pausanias (vii. 17), Attis was a beautiful
youth born of the daughter of the river Sangarius, who was descended
from the hermaphroditic Agdistis, a monster sprung from the earth by the
seed of Zeus. Having become enamoured of Attis, Agdistis struck him with
frenzy as he was about to wed the king's daughter, with the result that
he deprived himself of manhood and died. Agdistis in repentance
prevailed upon Zeus to grant that the body of the youth should never
decay or waste. In Arnobius (v. 5-8) Attis emasculates himself under a
pine tree, which the Great Mother bears into her cave as she and
Agdistis together wildly lament the death of the youth. Zeus grants the
petition as in the version of Pausanias, but permits the hair of Attis
to grow, and his little finger to move. The little finger, _digitus_,
[Greek: daktylos], is interpreted as the phallus by Georg Kaibel
(_Gottinger Nachrichten_, 1901, p. 513). In Diodorus (in. 58, 59) the
Mother is the carnal lover of Attis, and, when her father the king
discovers her fault and kills her lover, roams the earth in wild grief.
In Ovid (_Fasti_, iv. 223 ff.) she is inspired with chaste love for him,
which he pledges himself to reciprocate. On his proving unfaithful, the
Great Mother slays the nymph with whom he has sinned, whereupon in
madness he mutilates himself as a penalty. Another form of the legend
(Paus. vii. 17), showing the influence of the Aphrodite-Adonis myth,
relates that Attis, the impotent son of the Phrygian Caläust Lydia to
institute the worship of the Great Mother, and was there slain by a boar
sent by Zeus.

  See GREAT MOTHER OF THE GODS; J.G. Frazer, _Adonis, Attis, Osiris_
  (1906).     (G. Sn.)