ATTILA (d. 453), king of the Huns, became king in 433, along with his
brother Bleda, on the death of his uncle Roua. We hear but little as to
Bleda, who died about 445, possibly slain by his brother's orders. In
the first eight years of his reign Attila was chiefly occupied in the
wars with other barbarian tribes, by which he made himself virtually
supreme in central Europe. His own special kingdom comprised the
countries which are now called Hungary and Transylvania, his capital
being possibly not far from the modern city of Buda-Pest; but having
made the Ostrogoths, the Gepidae and many other Teutonic tribes his
subject-allies, and having also sent his invading armies into Media, he
seems for nearly twenty years to have ruled practically without a rival
from the Caspian to the Rhine. Very early in his reign, Honoria,
grand-daughter of the emperor Theodosius II., being subjected to severe
restraint on account of an amorous intrigue with one of the chamberlains
of the palace, sent her ring to the king of the Huns and called on him
to be her husband and her deliverer. Nothing came of the proposed
engagement, but the wrongs of Honoria, his affianced wife, served as a
convenient pretext for some of the constantly recurring embassies with
which Attila, fond of trampling on the fallen majesty of Rome, worried
and bullied the two courts of Constantinople and Ravenna. Another
frequent subject of complaint was found in certain sacred vessels which
the bishop of Sirmium had sent as a bribe to the secretary of Attila,
and which had been by him, fraudulently, as his master contended, pawned
to a silversmith at Rome. There were also frequent and imperious demands
for the surrender of fugitives who had sought shelter from the wrath of
Attila within the limits of the empire. One of the return embassies from
Constantinople, that sent in 448, had the great advantage of being
accompanied by a rhetorician named Priscus, whose minute journalistic
account of the negotiations, including as it does a vivid picture of the
great Hun in his banquet-hall, is by far the most valuable source of
information as to the court and camp of Attila. What lends additional
interest to the story is the fact that in the ambassador's suite there
was an interpreter named Vigilas, who for fifty pounds of gold had
promised to assassinate Attila. This base design was discovered by the
Hunnish king, but had never been revealed to the head of the embassy or
to his secretary. The situations created by this strange combination of
honest diplomacy and secret villainy are described by Priscus with real
dramatic power.

In 450 Theodosius II., the incapable emperor of the East, died, and his
throne was occupied by a veteran soldier named Marcian, who answered the
insulting message of Attila in a manlier tone than his predecessor.
Accordingly the Hun, who had something of the bully in his nature, now
turned upon Valentinian III., the trembling emperor of the West, and
demanded redress for the wrongs of Honoria, and one-half of
Valentinian's dominions as her dowry. Allying himself with the Franks
and Vandals, he led his vast many-nationed army to the Rhine in the
spring of 451, crossed that river, and sacked, apparently, most of the
cities in Belgic Gaul. Most fortunately for Europe, the Teutonic races
already settled in Gaul rallied to the defence of the empire against
invaders infinitely more barbarous than themselves. Prominent in this
new coalition was Theodoric, king of the Visigoths, whose capital city
was Toulouse. His firm fighting alliance with the Roman general Aëtius,
with whom he had had many a conflict in previous years, was one of the
best auguries for the new Europe that was to arise out of the ruins of
the Roman empire. Meanwhile Attila had reached the Loire and was
besieging the strong city of Orléans. The citizens, under the leadership
of their bishop Anianus, made a heroic defence, but the place was on the
point of being taken when, on the 24th of June, the allied Romano-Gothic
army was seen on the horizon. Attila, who knew the difficulty that he
should have in feeding his immense army if his march was further
delayed, turned again to the north-east, was persuaded by the venerable
bishop Lupus to spare the city of Troyes, but halted near that place in
the Catalaunian plains and offered battle to his pursuers Aëtius and
Theodoric. The battle which followed--certainly one of the decisive
battles of the world--has been well described by the Gothic historian
Jordanes as "ruthless, manifold, immense, obstinate." It lasted for the
whole day, and the number of the slain is variously stated at 175,000
and 300,000. All such estimates are, of course, untrustworthy, but there
is no doubt that the carnage was terrible. The Visigothic king was
slain, but the victory, though hardly earned, remained with his people
and his allies. Attila did not venture to renew the engagement on the
morrow, but retreated, apparently in good order, on the Rhine, recrossed
that river and returned to his Pannonian home. From thence in the spring
of 452 he again set forth to ravage or to conquer Italy. Her great
champion Aëtius showed less energy in her cause than he had shown in his
defence of Gaul. After a stubborn contest, Attila took and utterly
destroyed Aquileia, the chief city of Venetia, and then proceeded on his
destructive course, capturing and burning the cities at the head of the
Adriatic, Concordia, Altinum and Patavium (Padua). The fugitives from
these cities, but especially from the last, seeking shelter in the
lagoons of the Adriatic, laid the foundations of that which was one day
to become the glorious city of Venice. Upon Milan and the cities of
western Lombardy the hand of Attila seems to have weighed more lightly,
plundering rather than utterly destroying; and at last when Pope Leo I.,
at the head of a deputation of Roman senators, appeared in his camp on
the banks of the Mincio, entreating him not to pursue his victorious
career to the gates of Rome, he yielded to their entreaties and
consented to cross the Alps, with a menace, however, of future return,
should the wrongs of Honoria remain unredressed. As he himself jokingly
said: he knew how to conquer men, but the Lion and the Wolf (Leo and
Lupus) were too strong for him. No further expeditions to Italy were
undertaken by Attila, who died suddenly in 453, in the night following a
great banquet which celebrated his marriage with a damsel named Ildico.
Notwithstanding some rumours of violence it is probable that his death
was natural and due to his own intemperate habits.

Under his name of Etzel, Attila plays a great part in Teutonic legend
(see NIBELUNGENLIED) and under that of Atli in Scandinavian Saga, but
his historic lineaments are greatly obscured in both. He was short of
stature, swarthy and broad-chested, with a large head which early turned
grey, snub nose and deep-set eyes. He walked with proud step, darting a
haughty glance this way and that as if he felt himself lord of all.

  The chief authorities for the life of Attila are Priscus, Jordanes,
  the _Historia Miscella_, Apollonius Sidonius and Gregory of Tours.
       (T. H.)