ATTICA, a district of ancient Greece, triangular in shape, projecting in
a south-easterly direction into the Aegean Sea, the base line being
formed by the continuous chain of Mounts Cithaeron and Parnes, the apex
by the promontory of Sunium. It was washed on two sides by the sea, and
the coast is broken up into numerous small bays and harbours, which,
however, are with few exceptions exposed to the south wind. The surface
of Attica, as of the rest of Greece, is very mountainous, and between
the mountain chains lie several plains of no great size, open on one
side to the sea. On the west its natural boundary is the Corinthian
Gulf, so that it would include Megaris; indeed, before the Dorian
invasion, which resulted in the foundation of Megara, the whole country
was politically one, in the hands of the Ionian race. This is proved by
the column which, as we learn from Strabo, once stood on the Isthmus of
Corinth, bearing on one side in Greek the inscription, "This land is
Peloponnesus, not Ionia," and on the other, "This land is not
Peloponnesus, but Ionia."

The position of Attica was one main cause of its historical importance.
Hence in part arose the maritime character of its inhabitants; and when
they had once taken to the sea, the string of neighbouring islands,
Ceos, Cythnos and others, some of which lay within sight of their
coasts, and from one to another of which it was possible to sail without
losing sight of land, served to tempt them on to further enterprises.
Similarly on land, the post it occupied between northern Greece and the
Peloponnese materially influenced its relation to other states, both in
respect of its alliances, such as that with Thessaly, towards which it
was drawn by mutual hostility to Boeotia, which lay between them; and
also in respect of offensive combinations of other powers, as that
between Thebes and Sparta, which throughout an important part of Greek
history were closely associated in their politics, through mutual dread
of their powerful neighbour.

  Mountains.

The mountains of Attica, which form its most characteristic feature, are
a continuation of that chain which, starting from Tymphrestus at the
southern extremity of Pindus, passes through Phocis and Boeotia under
the names of Parnassus and Helicon; from this proceeds the range which,
as Cithaeron in its western and Parnes in its eastern portion, separates
Attica from Boeotia, throwing off spurs southward towards the Saronic
Gulf in Aegaleos and Hymettus, which bound the plain of Athens. Again,
the eastern extremity of Parnes is joined by another line of hills,
which, separating from Mount Oeta, skirts the Euboic Gulf, and, after
entering Attica, throws up the lofty pyramid of Pentelicus, overlooking
the plain of Marathon, and then sinks towards the sea at Sunium to rise
once more in the outlying islands. Finally, at the extreme west of the
whole district, Cithaeron is bent round at right angles in the direction
of the isthmus, at the northern approach to which it abuts against the
mighty mass of Mount Geraneia, which is interposed between the
Corinthian and the Saronic Gulf. Both Cithaeron and Parnes are about
4600 ft. high, Pentelicus 3635, and Hymettus 3370, while Aegaleos does
not rise higher than 1534 ft. At the present day they are extremely
bare, and in this respect almost repellent; but the lack of colour is
compensated by the delicacy of the outlines, the minute articulation of
the minor ridges and valleys, and the symmetrical grouping of the
several mountains.

  Soil.

The soil is light and thin, and requires very careful agriculture not
only on the rocky mountain sides but to some extent also in the maritime
plains. This fact had considerable influence on the inhabitants, both by
enforcing industrious habits and by leading them at an early period to
take to the sea. Still, the level ground was sufficiently fertile to
form a marked contrast to the rest of the district. Thucydides
attributes to the nature of the soil (i. 2 [Greek: to leptogeon]), which
presented no attraction to invaders, the permanence of the same
inhabitants in the country, whence arose the claim to indigenousness on
which the Athenians so greatly prided themselves; while at the same time
the richer ground fostered that fondness for country life, which is
proved by the enthusiastic terms in which it is always spoken of by
Aristophanes. That we are not justified in judging of the ancient
condition of the soil by, the aridity which prevails at the present day,
is shown by the fact that out of the 182 demes (see CLEISTHENES) into
which Attica was divided, one-tenth were named from trees or plants.

  Climate.

The climate of Attica has always been celebrated. In approaching Attica
from Boeotia a change of temperature is felt as soon as a person
descends from Cithaeron or Parnes, and the sea breeze, which in modern
times is called [Greek: ho embates], or that which sets towards shore,
moderates the heat in summer. The Attic comedians and Plato speak with
enthusiasm of their native climate, and the fineness of the Athenian
intellect was attributed to the clearness of the Attic atmosphere. It
was in the neighbourhood of Athens itself that the air was thought to
be purest. So Euripides describes the inhabitants as "ever walking
gracefully through the most luminous ether" (_Med._ 829); and Milton--

  "Where, on the Aegean shore, a city stands,
   Built nobly, pure the air, and light the soil--
   Athens, the eye of Greece."

Or again Xenophon says "one would not err in thinking that this city is
placed near the centre of Greece--nay, of the civilized world--because,
the farther removed persons are from it, the severer is the cold or heat
they meet with" (_Vectigal._ i. 6). The air is so clear that one can see
from the Acropolis the lines of white marble that streak the sides of
Pentelicus. The brilliant colouring which is so conspicuous in an
Athenian sunset is due to the same cause. The epithet "violet-crowned,"
used of Athens by Pindar, is due either to the blue haze on the
surrounding hills, or to the use of violets (or irises) for festal
wreaths. This otherwise perfect climate is slightly marred by the
prevalence of the north wind. This is expressed on the Horologium of
Andronicus Cyrrhestes, called the Temple or Tower of the Winds, at
Athens, where Boreas is represented as a bearded man of stern aspect,
thickly clad, and wearing strong buskins; he blows into a conch shell,
which he holds in his hand as a sign of his tempestuous character.

  Vegetation.

  Minerals.

Of the flora of Attica, the olive is the most important. This tree, we
learn from Herodotus (v. 82), was thought at one time to have been found
in that country only; and the enthusiastic praises of Sophocles (_Oed.
Col._ 700) teach us that it was the land in which it flourished best. So
great was the esteem in which it was held, that in the early legend of
the struggle between the gods of sea and land, Poseidon and Athena, for
the patronage of the country, the sea-god is represented as having to
retire vanquished before the giver of the olive; and at a later period
the evidences of this contention were found in an ancient olive tree in
the Acropolis, together with three holes in the rock, said to have been
made by the trident of Poseidon, and to be connected with a salt well
hard by. The fig also found its favourite home in this country, for
Demeter was said to have bestowed it as a gift on the Eleusinian
Phytalus, i.e. "the gardener." Both Cithaeron and Parnes must have been
wooded in former times; for on the former are laid the picturesque
silvan scenes in the _Bacchae_ of Euripides, and it was from the latter
that the wood came which caused the neighbouring deme of Acharnae to be
famous for its charcoal--the [Greek: anthrakes Parnesioi] of the
_Acharnians_ of Aristophanes (348). From the thymy slopes of Hymettus
came the famous Hymettian honey. Among the other products we must notice
the marble--both that of Pentelicus, which afforded a material of
unrivalled purity and whiteness for building the Athenian temples, and
the blue marble of Hymettus--the _trabes Hymettiae_ of Horace--which
used to be transported to Rome for the construction of palaces. But the
richest of all the sources of wealth in Attica was the silver mines of
Laurium, the yield of which was so considerable as to render silver the
principal medium of exchange in Greece, so that "a silver piece"
([Greek: argurion]) was the Greek equivalent term for money. Hence
Aeschylus speaks of the Athenians as possessing a "fountain of silver"
(_Pers._ 235), and Aristophanes makes his chorus of birds promise the
audience that, if they show him favour, owls from Laurium (i.e. silver
pieces with the emblem of Athens) shall never fail them (_Birds_, 1106).
The reputation of these coins for purity of metal and accuracy of weight
was so great that they had a very wide circulation, and in consequence
it was thought undesirable to make any alteration in the types lest
their genuineness should be doubted. This accounts for the somewhat
inartistic character which the Athenian coins maintained to the last
(see further NUMISMATICS: _Greek_, § Athens). In Strabo's time, though
the mines had almost ceased to yield, silver was obtained in
considerable quantities from the scoriae; and at the present day a large
amount of lead is got in the same way, the work being chiefly carried on
by two companies, one of which is French and the ether Greek. In the
ancient workings, many of which are in the same condition as they were
left 1800 years ago, there are in all 2000 shafts and galleries.

  Plain of Megara.

It has been already mentioned that the base line of Attica is formed by
the chain of Cithaeron and Parnes, running from west to east; and that
from this transverse chains run southward, dividing Attica into a
succession of plains. The westernmost of these, which is separated from
the innermost bay of the Corinthian Gulf, called the Mare Alcyonium, by
an offshoot of Cithaeron, and is bounded on the east by a ridge which
ends towards the Saronic Gulf in a striking two-horned peak called
Kerata, is the plain of Megara. It is only for geographical purposes
that we include this district under Attica, for both the Dorian race of
the inhabitants, and its dangerous proximity to Athens, caused it to be
at perpetual feud with that city; but its position as an outpost for the
Peloponnesians, together with the fact of its having once been Ionian
soil, sufficiently explains the bitter hostility of the Athenians
towards the Megarians. The great importance of Megara arose from its
commanding all the passes into the Peloponnese. These were three in
number: one along the shores of the Corinthian Gulf, which, owing to the
nature of the ground, makes a long detour; the other two starting from
Megara, and passing, the one by a lofty though gradual route over the
ridge of Geraneia, the other along the Saronic Gulf, under the dangerous
precipices of the Scironian rocks.

  Plain of Eleusis.

To the east of the plain of Megara lies that of Eleusis, bounded on the
one side by the chain of Kerata, and on the other by that of Aegaleos,
through a depression in which was the line of the sacred way, where the
torchlight processions from Athens used to descend to the coast, the
"brightly gleaming shores" ([Greek: lampades aktai]) of Sophocles (_Oed.
Col._ 1049). The deep bay which here runs into the land is bounded on
its southern side by the rocky island of Salamis, which was at all times
an important possession to the Athenians on account of its proximity to
their city; and the winding channel which separates that island from the
mainland in the direction of the Peiraeus was the scene of the battle of
Salamis, while on the last declivities of Mt. Aegaleos, which here
descends to the sea, was the spot where, as Byron wrote--

  "A king sate on the rocky brow
   Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis."

The eastern portion of the plain of Eleusis was called the Thriasian
plain, and the city itself was situated in the recesses of the bay just
mentioned.

  Plain of Athens.

Next in order to the plain of Eleusis came that of Athens, which is the
most extensive of all, reaching from the foot of Parnes to the sea, and
bounded on the west by Aegaleos, and on the east by Hymettus. Its most
conspicuous feature is the broad line of dark green along its western
side, formed by the olive-groves of Colonus and the gardens of the
Academy, which owe their fertility to the waters of the Cephisus. This
river is fed by copious sources on the side of Mt. Parnes, and thus,
unlike the other rivers of Attica, has a constant supply of water, which
was diverted in classical times, as it still is, into the neighbouring
plantations (cf. Sophocles, _Oed. Col._ 685). The position of Colonus
itself is marked by two bare knolls of light-coloured earth, which
caused the poet in the same chorus to apply the epithet "white" ([Greek:
argeta]) to that place. On the opposite side of the plain runs the other
river, the Ilissus, which rises from two sources on the side of Mt.
Hymettus, and skirts the eastern extremity of the city of Athens; but
this, notwithstanding its celebrity, is a mere brook, which stands in
pools a great part of the year, and in summer is completely dry. The
situation of Athens relatively to the surrounding objects is singularly
harmonious; for, while it forms a central point, so as to be the eye of
the plain, and while the altar-rock of the Acropolis and the hills by
which it is surrounded are conspicuous from every point of view, there
is no such exactness in its position as to give formality, since it is
nearer to the sea than to Parnes, and nearer to Hymettus than to
Aegaleos. The most striking summit in the neighbourhood of the city is
that of Lycabettus, on the north-eastern side; and the variety is still
further increased by the continuation of the ridge which it forms for
some distance northwards through the plain. Three roads lead to Athens
from the Boeotian frontier over the intervening mountain barrier--the
easternmost over Parnes, from Delium and Oropus by Decelea, which was
the usual route of the invading Lacedaemonians during the Peloponnesian
War; the westernmost over Cithaeron, by the pass of Dryoscephalae, or
the "Oakheads," leading from Thebes by Plataea to Eleusis, and so to
Athens, which we hear of in connexion with the battle of Plataea, and
with the escape of the Plataeans at the time of the siege of that city
in the Peloponnesian War; the third, midway between the two, by the pass
of Phyle, near the summit of which, on a rugged height overlooking the
Athenian plain, is the fort occupied by Thrasybulus in the days of the
Thirty Tyrants. On the sea-coast to the south-west of Athens rises the
hill of Munychia, a mass of rocky ground, forming the acropolis of the
town of Peiraeus. It was probably at one time an island; this was
Strabo's opinion, and at the present day the ground which joins it to
the mainland is low and swampy, and seems to have been formed by
alluvial soil brought down by the Cephisus. On one side of this, towards
Hymettus, lay the open roadstead of Phalerum, on the other the harbour
of Peiraeus, a completely land-locked inlet, safe, deep and spacious,
the approach to which was still further narrowed by moles. The eastern
side of the hill was further indented by two small but commodious
havens, which were respectively called Zea and Munychia.

  Eastern Attica.

The north-eastern boundary of the plain of Athens is formed by the
graceful pyramid of Pentelicus, which received its name from the deme of
Pentele at its foot, but was far more commonly known as Brilessus in
ancient times. This mountain did not form a continous chain with
Hymettus, for between them intervenes a level space of ground 2 m. in
width, which formed the entrance to the Mesogaea, an elevated undulating
plain in the midst of the mountains, reaching nearly to Sunium. At the
extremity of Hymettus, where it projects into the Saronic Gulf, was the
promontory of Zoster ("the Girdle"), which was so called because it
girdles and protects the neighbouring harbour; but in consequence of the
name, a legend was attached to it, to the effect that Latona had loosed
her girdle there. From this promontory to Sunium there runs a lower line
of mountains, and between these and the sea a fertile strip of land
intervenes, which was called the Paralia. Beyond Sunium, on the eastern
coast, were two safe ports, that of Thoricus, which is defended by the
island of Helene, forming a natural breakwater in front of it, and that
of Prasiac, now called Porto Raphti ("the Tailor"), from a statue at the
entrance to which the natives have given that name. In the north-east
corner is the little plain of Marathon (q.v.), the scene of the battle
against the Persians (490 B.C.). It lies between Parnes, Pentelicus and
the sea. The bay in front is sheltered by Euboea, and on the north by a
projecting tongue of land, called Cynosura. The mountains in the
neighbourhood were the home of the Diacrii or Hyperacrii, who, being
poor mountaineers, and having nothing to lose, were the principal
advocates of political reform; while, on the other hand, the Pedieis, or
inhabitants of the plains, being wealthy landholders, formed the strong
conservative element, and the Parali, or occupants of the sea-coast,
representing the mercantile interest, held an intermediate position
between the two (see CLEISTHENES). Finally, there was one district of
Attica, the territory of Oropus, which properly belonged to Boeotia, as
it was situated to the north of Parnes; but on this the Athenians always
endeavoured to retain a firm hold, because it facilitated their
communications with Euboea. The command of that island was of the utmost
importance to them; for, if Aegina could rightly be called "the eyesore
of the Peiraeus," Euboea was quite as truly a thorn in the side of
Attica; for we learn from Demosthenes (_De Cor._ p. 307) that at one
period the pirates that made it their headquarters so infested the
neighbouring sea as to prevent all navigation.

  Excavations.

The place in Attica which has been the chief scene of excavations
(independently of Athens and its vicinity) is Eleusis (q.v.), where
the remains of the sanctuary of Demeter, the home of the Eleusinian
Mysteries, together with other buildings in its neighbourhood, were
cleared by the Greek Archaeological Society in 1882-1887 and 1895-1896.
Of the other classical ruins in Attica the best-known is the temple of
Athena at Sunium, which forms a conspicuous object on the headland, to
which it gave the name of Cape Colonnae, still used by the peasants. It
is in the Doric style, of white marble, and eleven columns of the
peristyle and one of the pronaos are now standing. At Thoricus there is
a theatre, which was cleared of earth by the archaeologists of the
American School in 1886. In the neighbourhood of Rhamnus are the remains
of two temples that stood side by side, the larger of which was
dedicated to Nemesis, the smaller probably to Themis, of which goddess a
fine statue was discovered in its ruins in the course of the excavations
of the Greek Archaeological Society in 1890. The same Society, in
1884,1886 and 1887, excavated the sanctuary of Amphiaraus, 4 m. from
Oropus; in ancient times this was the resort of numerous invalids, who
came thither to consult the healing divinity. Within it were found a
temple of Amphiaraus, a large altar, and a long colonnade, which may
have been the dormitory where the patients slept in hope of obtaining
counsel in dreams. There were also baths and a small theatre, and
numerous inscriptions relating to the arrangement and observances of the
sanctuary and oracle. The walls and towers also of the city of
Eleutherae and the fortress of Phyle are fine specimens of Hellenic
fortifications.

Of the condition of Attica in medieval and modern times little need be
said, for it has followed for the most part the fortunes of Athens. The
population, however, has undergone a great change, independently of the
large admixture of Slavonic blood that has affected the Greeks of the
mainland generally, by the immigration of Albanian colonists, who now
occupy a great part of the country. The district formed part of the
_nome_ (administrative division) of Boeotia and Attica until 1899, when
it became a separate _nome_.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--J.G. Frazer, _Pausanias's Description of Greece_, vols.
  ii. and v. (London, 1898); W.M. Leake, _The Demi of Attica_ (2nd ed.,
  London, 1841); Chr. Wordsworth, _Athens and Attica_ (4th ed., London,
  1869); C. Bursian, _Geographic von Griechenland_, vol. i. (Leipzig,
  1862); Baedeker's _Greece_ (4th Eng. ed., Leipzig, 1908); _Karten von
  Attica_, published by the German Archaeological Institute of Athens,
  with explanatory text, chiefly by Professor Milchhofer (1875-1903);
  see also ATHENS, ELEUSIS and GREECE: _Topography_.     (H. F. T.)