ATTICUS, TITUS POMPONIUS (109-32 B.C.), Roman patron of letters, was
born at Rome three years before Cicero, with whom he and the younger
Marius were educated. His name was Titus Pomponius, that of Atticus, by
which he is known, being given him afterwards from his long residence in
Athens (86-65) and his intimate acquaintance with the Greek literature
and language. His family is said to have been of noble and ancient
descent; his father belonged to the equestrian order, and was very
wealthy. When Pomponius was still a young man his father died, and he at
once took the prudent resolution of transferring himself and his fortune
to Athens, in order to escape the dangers of the civil war, in which he
might have been involved through his connexion with the murdered
tribune, Sulpicius Rufus. Here he lived in retirement, devoting himself
entirely to study. On his return to Rome, he took possession of an
inheritance left him by his uncle and assumed the name of Quintus
Caecilius Pomponianus. From this time he kept aloof from political
strife, attaching himself to no particular party, and continuing on
intimate terms with men so opposed as Caesar and Pompey, Antony and
Octavian. His most intimate friend, however, was Cicero, whose
correspondence with him extended over many years, and who seems to have
found his prudent counsel and sympathy a remedy for all his many
troubles. His private life was tranquil and happy. He did not marry till
he was fifty-three years of age, and his only child became the wife of
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, the distinguished minister of Augustus. In 32,
being seized with an illness believed to be incurable, he starved
himself to death. Of his writings none is extant, but mention is made of
two: a Greek history of Cicero's consulship, and some annals, in Latin,
an epitome of the events of Roman history down to the year 54. His most
important work was his edition of the letters addressed to him by
Cicero. He also formed a large library at Athens, and engaged a staff of
slaves to make copies of valuable works.

  See Life by Cornelius Nepos; Berwick, _Lives of Messalla Corvinus and
  T.P.A._ (1813); Fialon, _Thesis in T.P.A._ (1861); Boissier, _Cicéron
  et ses amis_ (1888: Eng. trans. A.D. Jones, 1897); Peter,
  _Historicorum Romanorum Fragmenta._