ATTICUS HERODES, TIBERIUS CLAUDIUS (c. A.D. 101-177), Greek rhetorician,
was born at Marathon in Attica. He belonged to a wealthy and
distinguished family, and received a careful education under the most
distinguished masters of the time, especially in rhetoric and
philosophy. His talents gained him the favourable notice of Hadrian, who
appointed him praefect of the free towns in the province of Asia (125).
On his return to Athens, he attained great celebrity as an orator and
teacher of rhetoric, and was elected to the office of archon. In 140 he
was summoned by Antoninus Pius to undertake the education of Marcus
Aurelius and Lucius Verus, and received many marks of favour, amongst
them the consulship (143). He is principally celebrated, however, for
the vast sums he expended on public purposes. He built at Athens a great
race-course of Pentelic marble, and a splendid musical theatre, called
the Odeum in memory of his wife Regilla, which still exists. At Corinth
he built a theatre, at Delphi a stadium, at Thermopylae hot baths, at
Canusium in Italy an aqueduct. He even contemplated cutting a canal
through the Isthmus of Corinth, but was afraid to carry out his plan
because the same thing had been unsuccessfully attempted before by the
emperor Nero. Many of the partially ruined cities of Greece were
restored by Atticus, and numerous inscriptions testify their gratitude
to their benefactor. His latter years were embittered by family
misfortune, and having incurred the enmity of the Athenians, he withdrew
from Athens to his villa near Marathon, where he died. He enjoyed a very
high reputation amongst his contemporaries, and wrote numerous works, of
which the only one to come down to us is a rhetorical exercise _On the
Constitution_ (ed. Hass, 1880), advocating an alliance of the Thebans
and Peloponnesians against Archelaus, king of Macedonia. The genuineness
of this speech, which is of little merit, has been disputed.

  Philostratus, _Vit. Soph._ ii. 1; Fiorillo, _Herodis Attici quae
  supersunt_ (1801); _A Biographical Notice of A.H._ (London, 1832),
  privately printed; Fuelles, _De Herodis Attici Vita_ (1864);
  Vidal-Lablache, _Hérode Atticus_ (1871).