ATTORNEY-GENERAL, in England, the chief law officer appointed to manage
all the legal affairs and suits in which the crown is interested. He is
appointed by letters-patent authorizing him to hold office during the
sovereign's pleasure. He is _ex officio_ the leader of the bar, and only
counsel of the highest eminence are appointed to the office. The origin
of the office is uncertain, but as far back as 1277 we find an
_attornatus regis_ appointed to look after the interests of the crown,
in proceedings affecting it before the courts. He has precedence in all
the courts, and in the House of Lords he has precedence of the lord
advocate, even in Scottish appeals, but unlike the lord advocate and the
Irish attorney-general he is not necessarily made a privy councillor. He
is a necessary party to all proceedings affecting the crown, and has
extensive powers of control in matters relating to charities, lunatics'
estates, criminal prosecutions, &c. The attorney-general and the
solicitor-general are always members of the House of Commons (except for
temporary difficulties in obtaining a seat) and of the ministry, being
selected from the party in power, and their advice is at the disposal of
the government and of each department of the government, while in the
House of Commons they defend the legality of ministerial action if
called in question. Previously to 1895 there was no restriction placed
on the law officers as to their acceptance of private practice, but
since that date this privilege has been withdrawn, and the salary of the
attorney-general is fixed at £7000 a year and in addition such fees
according to the ordinary professional scales as he may receive for any
litigious business he may conduct on behalf of the crown. The crown has
also as a legal adviser an attorney-general in Ireland. In Scotland he
is called lord advocate (q.v.). There is also an attorney-general in
almost all the British colonies, and his duties are very similar to
those of the same officer in England. In the self-governing colonies he
is appointed by the administration of the colony, and in the crown
colonies by royal warrant under the signet and sign-manual. There is an
attorney-general for the duchy of Cornwall and also one for the duchy of
Lancaster, each of whom sues in matters relating to that duchy.

The United States has an officer of this name, who has a seat in the
cabinet. His duties are in general to represent the federal government
before the United States Supreme Court, to advise the president on
questions of law, and to advise similarly the heads of the state
departments with reference to matters affecting their department. His
opinions are published by the government periodically for the use of its
officials and they are frequently cited by the courts. Every state but
one or two has a similar officer. He represents the state in important
legal matters, and is often required to assist the local prosecutor in
trials for capital offences. He appears for the public interest in suits
affecting public charities. He is generally elected by the people for
the same term as the governor and on the same ticket.