ATTORNEY (from O. Fr. _atorné_ a person appointed to act for another,
from _atourner_, legal Lat. _attornare_, attorn, literally to turn over
to another or commit business to another), in English law, in its widest
sense, any substitute or agent appointed to act in "the turn, stead or
place of another." Attorneys are of two kinds, attorneys-in-fact and
attorneys-at-law. An attorney-in-fact is simply an agent, the extent of
whose capacity to act is bounded only by the powers embodied in his
authority, his _power of attorney_. An attorney-at-law was a public
officer, conducting legal proceedings on behalf of others, known as his
clients, and attached to the supreme courts of common law at
Westminster. Attorneys-at-law corresponded to the solicitors of the
courts of chancery and the proctors of the admiralty, ecclesiastical,
probate and divorce courts. Since the passing of the Judicature Act of
1873, however, the designation "attorney" has become obsolete in
England, all persons admitted as solicitors, attorneys or proctors of
an English court being henceforth called "solicitors of the supreme
court" (see SOLICITOR).

In the United States an attorney-at-law exercises all the functions
distributed in England between barristers, attorneys and solicitors, and
his full title is "attorney and counsellor-at-law." When acting in a
court of admiralty he is styled "proctor" or "advocate." Formerly, in
some states, there existed a grade among lawyers of attorneys-at-law,
which was inferior to that of counsellors-at-law, and in colonial times
New Jersey established a higher rank still--that of serjeant-at-law. Now
the term attorney-at-law is precisely equivalent to that of lawyer.
Attorneys are admitted by some court to which the legislature confides
the power, and on examination prescribed by the court, or by a board of
state examiners, as the case may be. The term of study required is
generally two or three years, but in some states less. In one no
examination is required. College graduates are often admitted to
examination after a shorter term of study than that required from those
not so educated. In the courts of the United States, admission is
regulated by rules of court and based upon a previous admission to the
state bar. In almost all states aliens are not admitted as attorneys,
and in many states women are ineligible, but during recent years several
states have passed statutes permitting them to practise. Since 1879
women have been eligible to practise before the U.S. Supreme Court, if
already admitted to practise in some state court, under the same
conditions as men. A _state attorney_ or _district attorney_ is the
local public prosecutor. He is either elected by popular vote at the
state elections for the district in which he resides and goes out of
office with the political party for which he was elected, or he is
appointed by the governor of the state for that district and for the
same term. He represents the state in criminal prosecutions and also in
civil actions within his district. There is a _United States district
attorney_ in each federal district, similarly representing the federal
government before the courts.

An attorney is an officer of the court which admits him to practise, and
he is subject to its discipline. He is liable to his client in damages
for failure to exercise ordinary care and skill, and he can bring action
for the value of his services. He has a lien on his client's papers, and
usually on any judgment in favour of his client to secure the payment of
his fees. (See also under BAR, THE.)