ATTWOOD, THOMAS (1783-1856), English political reformer, was born at
Halesowen, Worcestershire, on the 6th of October 1783. In 1800 he
entered his father's banking business in Birmingham, where he was
elected high bailiff in 1811. He took a leading part in the public life
of the city, and became very popular with the artisan class. He is now
remembered for his share in the movement which led to the carrying of
the Reform Act of 1832. He was one of the founders, in January 1830, of
the Political Union, branches of which were soon formed throughout
England. Under his leadership vast crowds of working-men met
periodically in the neighbourhood of Birmingham to demonstrate in favour
of reform of the franchise, and Attwood used his power over the
multitude to repress any action on their part which might savour of
illegality. His successful exertions in favour of reform made him a
popular hero all over the country, and he was presented with the freedom
of the city of London. After the passing of the Reform Act in 1832 he
was elected one of the members for the new borough of Birmingham, for
which he sat till 1839. He failed in the House of Commons to maintain
the reputation which he had made outside it, for in addition to an eager
partisanship in favour of every ultra-democratic movement, he was
wearisomely persistent in advocating his peculiar monetary theory. This
theory, which became with him a monomania, was that the existing
currency should be rectified in favour of state-regulated and
inconvertible paper-money, and the adoption of a system for altering the
standard of value as prices fluctuated. His waning influence with his
constituents led him to retire from parliament in 1837, and, though
invited to re-enter political life in 1843, he had by that time become a
thoroughly spent force. He died at Great Malvern on the 6th of March
1856.

  His grandson, C.M. Wakefield, wrote his life "for private circulation"
  (there is a copy in the British Museum), and his economic theories are
  set forth in a little book, _Gemini_, by T.B. Wright and J. Harlow,
  published in 1844.