ATTWOOD, THOMAS (1765-1838), English composer, the son of a coal
merchant who had musical tastes, was born in London on the 23rd of
November 1765. At the age of nine he became a chorister in the Chapel
Royal, where he remained for five years. In 1783 he was sent to study
abroad at the expense of the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV.),
who had been favourably impressed by his skill at the harpsichord. After
spending two years at Naples, Attwood proceeded to Vienna, where he
became a favourite pupil of Mozart. On his return to London in 1787 he
held for a short time an appointment as one of the chamber musicians to
the prince of Wales. In 1796 he was chosen organist of St Paul's, and in
the same year he was made composer to the Chapel Royal. His court
connexion was further confirmed by his appointment as musical instructor
to the duchess of York, and afterwards to the princess of Wales. For the
coronation of George IV. he composed the anthem, "The King shall
rejoice," a work of high merit. The king, who had neglected him for some
years on account of his connexion with the princess of Wales, now
restored him to favour, and in 1821 appointed him organist to his
private chapel at Brighton. Soon after the institution of the Royal
Academy of Music in 1823, Attwood was chosen one of the professors. He
was also one of the original members of the Philharmonic Society,
founded in 1813. He wrote the anthem, "O Lord, grant the King a Long
Life," which was performed at the coronation of William IV., and he was
composing a similar work for the coronation of Queen Victoria when he
died at his house in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, on the 24th of March 1838. He
was buried under the organ in St Paul's cathedral. His services and
anthems were published in a collected form after his death by his pupil
Walmisley. Of his secular compositions several songs and glees are well
known and popular. The numerous operas which he composed in early life
are now practically forgotten. Of his songs the most popular was "The
Soldier's Dream," and the best of his glees were "In peace Love tunes
the shepherd's reed," and "To all that breathe the air of Heaven."
Attwood was a friend of Mendelssohn, for whom he professed an admiration
at a time when the young German's talent was little appreciated by the
majority of English musicians.