AUBE, a department of north-eastern France, bounded N. by the department
of Marne, N.W. by Seine-et-Marne, W. by Yonne, S. by Yonne and
Cote-d'Or, and E. by Haute-Marne; it was formed in 1790 from
Basse-Champagne, and a small portion of Burgundy. Area, 2326 sq. m. Pop.
(1906) 243,670. The department belongs to the Seine basin, and is
watered chiefly by the Seine and the Aube. These rivers follow the
general slope of the department, which is from south-east, where the
Bois du Mont (1200 ft.), the highest point, is situated, to north-west.
The southern and eastern districts are fertile and well wooded. The
remainder of the department, with the exception of a more broken and
picturesque district in the extreme north-west, forms part of the
sterile and monotonous plain known as Champagne Pouilleuse. The climate
is mild but damp. The annual rainfall over the greater part varies from
24 to 28 in.; but in the extreme south-east it at times reaches a height
of 36 in. Aube is an agricultural department; more than one third of its
surface consists of arable land of which the chief products are wheat
and oats, and next to them rye, barley and potatoes; vegetables are
extensively cultivated in the valleys of the Seine and the Aube. The
vine flourishes chiefly on the hills of the south-east; the wines of Les
Riceys, Bar-sur-Aube, Bouilly and Laines-aux-Bois are most esteemed. The
river valleys abound in natural pasture, and sainfoin, lucerne and other
forage crops are largely grown; cattle-raising is an important source of
wealth, and the cheeses of Troyes are well known. There are excellent
nurseries and orchards in the neighbourhood of Troyes, Bar-sur-Seine,
Méry-sur-Seine and Brienne. Chalk, from which _blanc de Troyes_ is
manufactured, and clay are abundant; and there are peat workings and
quarries of building-stone and limestone. The spinning and weaving of
cotton and the manufacture of hosiery, of both of which Troyes is the
centre, are the main industries of the department; there are also a
large number of distilleries, tanneries, oil works, tile and brick
works, flour-mills, saw-mills and dye-works. The Eastern railway has
works at Romilly, and there are iron works at Clairvaux and wire-drawing
works at Plaines; but owing to the absence of coal and iron mines, metal
working is of small importance. The exports of Aube consist of timber,
cereals, agricultural products, hosiery, wine, dressed pork, &c.; its
imports include wool and raw cotton, coal and machinery, especially
looms. The department is served by the Eastern railway, of which the
main line to Belfort crosses it. The river Aube is navigable for 28 m.
(from Arcis-sur-Aube to its confluence with the Seine); the Canal de la
Haute-Seine extends beside the Seine from Bar-sur-Seine to Marcilly
(just outside the department) a distance of 46 m.; below Marcilly the
Seine is canalized.

Aube is divided into 5 arrondissements with 26 cantons and 446 communes.
It falls within the educational circumscription (_academie_) of Dijon
and the military circumscription of the XX. army corps; its court of
appeal is in Paris. It constitutes the diocese of Troyes and part of the
archiepiscopal province of Sens. The capital of the department is
Troyes; of the arrondissements the capitals are Troyes, Bar-sur-Aube,
Arcis-sur-Aube, Bar-sur-Seine and Nogent-sur-Seine. The architecture of
the department is chiefly displayed in its churches, many of which
possess stained glass of the 16th century. Besides the cathedral and
other churches of Troyes, those of Mussy-sur-Seine (13th century),
Chaource (16th century) and Nogent-sur-Seine (15th and 16th centuries),
are of note. The abbey buildings of Clairvaux are the type of the
Cistercian abbey.