AUBIGNÉ, JEAN HENRI MERLE D' (1794-1872), Swiss Protestant divine and
historian, was born on the 16th of August 1794, at Eaux Vives, near
Geneva. The ancestors of his father, Aimé Robert Merle d'Aubigné
(1755-1799), were French Protestant refugees. Jean Henri was destined by
his parents to a commercial life; but at college he decided to be
ordained. He was profoundly influenced by Robert Haldane, the Scottish
missionary and preacher who visited Geneva. When in 1817 he went abroad
to further his education, Germany was about to celebrate the
tercentenary of the Reformation; and thus early he conceived the
ambition to write the history of that great epoch. At Berlin he received
stimulus from teachers so unlike as J.A.W. Neander and W.M.L. de Wette.
After presiding for five years over the French Protestant church at
Hamburg, he was, in 1823, called to become pastor of a congregation in
Brussels and preacher to the court. He became also president of the
consistory of the French and German Protestant churches. At the Belgian
revolution of 1830 he thought it advisable to undertake pastoral work at
home rather than to accept an educational post in the family of the
Dutch king. The Evangelical Society had been founded with the idea of
promoting evangelical Christianity in Geneva and elsewhere, but it was
found that there was also needed a theological school for the training
of pastors. On his return to Switzerland, d'Aubigné was invited to
become professor of church history in an institution of the kind, and
continued to labour in the cause of evangelical Protestantism. In him
the Evangelical Alliance found a hearty promoter. He frequently visited
England, was made a D.C.L. by Oxford University, and received civic
honours from the city of Edinburgh. He died suddenly in 1872.

His principal works are--_Discours sur l'étude de l'histoire de
Christianisme_ (Geneva, 1832); _Le Luthéranisme et la Réforme_ (Paris,
1844); _Germany, England and Scotland, or Recollections of a Swiss
Pastor_ (London, 1848); _Trois siècles de lutte en Écosse, ou deux rois
et deux royaumes; Le Protecteur ou la république d'Angleterre aux jours
de Cromwell_ (Paris, 1848); _Le Concile et l'infaillibililé_ (1870);
_Histoire de la Réformation au XVI^ième siècle_ (Paris, 1835-1853; new
ed:, 1861-1862, in 5 vols.); and _Histoire de la Réformation en Europe
au temps de Calvin_ (8 vols., 1862-1877).

The first portion of his _Histoire de la Réformation_, which was devoted
to the earlier period of the movement in Germany, gave him at once a
foremost place amongst modern French ecclesiastical historians, and was
translated into most European tongues. The second portion, dealing with
reform in the time of Calvin, was not less thorough, and had a subject
hitherto less exhaustively treated, but it did not meet with the same
success. This part of the subject, with which he was most competent to
deal, was all but completed at the time of his death. Among his minor
treatises, the most important are the vindication of the character and
aims of Oliver Cromwell, and the sketch of the contendings of the Church
of Scotland.

Indefatigable in sifting original documents, Aubigné had amassed a
wealth of authentic information; but his desire to give in all cases a
full and graphic picture, assisted by a vivid imagination, betrayed him
into excess of detail concerning minor events, and in a few cases into
filling up a narrative by inference from later conditions. Moreover, in
his profound sympathy with the Reformers, he too frequently becomes
their apologist. But his work is a monument of painstaking sincerity,
and brings us into direct contact with the spirit of the period.