AUBIGNÉ, THÉODORE AGRIPPA D' (1552-1630), French poet and historian, was
born at St Maury, near Pons, in Saintonge, on the 8th of February 1552.
His name Agrippa (_aegre partus_) was given him through his mother dying
in childbirth. In his childhood he showed a great aptitude for
languages; according to his own account he knew Latin, Greek and Hebrew
at six years of age; and he had translated the _Crito_ of Plato before
he was eleven. His father, a Huguenot who had been one of the
conspirators of Amboise, strengthened his Protestant sympathies by
showing him, while they were passing through that town on their way to
Paris, the heads of the conspirators exposed upon the scaffold, and
adjuring him not to spare his own head in order to avenge their death.
After a brief residence he was obliged to flee from Paris to avoid
persecution, but was captured and threatened with death. Escaping
through the intervention of a friend, he went to Montargis. In his
fourteenth year he was present at the siege of Orléans, at which his
father was killed. His guardian sent him to Geneva, where he studied for
a considerable time under the direction of Beza. In 1567 he made his
escape from tutelage, and attached himself to the Huguenot army under
the prince of Condé. Subsequently he joined Henry of Navarre, whom he
succeeded in withdrawing from the corrupting influence of the house of
Valois (1576), and to whom he rendered valuable service, both as a
soldier and as a counsellor, in the wars that issued in his elevation to
the throne as Henry IV. After a furious battle at Casteljaloux, and
suffering from fever from his wounds, he wrote his _Tragiques_ (1571).
He was in the battle of Coutras (1587), and at the siege of Paris
(1590). His career at camp and court, however, was a somewhat chequered
one, owing to the roughness of his manner and the keenness of his
criticisms, which made him many enemies and severely tried the king's
patience. In his _tragédie-ballet Circe_ (1576) he did not hesitate to
indulge in the most outspoken sarcasm against the king and other members
of the royal family. Though he more than once found it expedient to
retire into private life he never entirely lost the favour of Henry, who
made him governor of Maillezais. After the conversion of the king to
Roman Catholicism, d'Aubigné remained true to the Huguenot cause, and a
fearless advocate of the Huguenot interests. The first two volumes of
the work by which he is best known, his _Histoire universelle depuis
1550 jusqu'à l'an 1601_, appeared in 1616 and 1618 respectively. The
third volume was published in 1619, but, being still more free and
personal in its satire than those which had preceded it, it was
immediately ordered to be burned by the common hangman. The work is a
lively chronicle of the incidents of camp and court life, and forms a
very valuable source for the history of France during the period it
embraces. In September 1620 its author was compelled to take refuge in
Geneva, where he found a secure retreat for the last ten years of his
life, though the hatred of the French court showed itself in procuring a
sentence of death to be recorded against him more than once. He devoted
the period of his exile to study, and the superintendence of works for
the fortifications of Bern and Basel which were designed as a material
defence of the cause of Protestantism. He died at Geneva on the 29th of
April 1630.

  A complete edition of his works according to the original MSS. was
  begun by E. Réaume and F. de Caussade (1879). It contains all the
  literary works, the _Aventures du baron de Faeneste_ (1617), and the
  _Mémoires_ (6 vols., 1873-1892). The best edition of the _Histoire
  universelle_ is by A. de Ruble. The _Mémoires_ were edited by L.
  Lalanne (1854).