AUBREY, JOHN (1626-1697), English antiquary, was born at Easton Pierse
or Percy, near Malmesbury, Wiltshire, on the 12th of March 1626, his
father being a country gentleman of considerable fortune. He was
educated at the Malmesbury grammar school under Robert Latimer, who had
numbered Thomas Hobbes among his earlier pupils, and at his
schoolmaster's house Aubrey first met the philosopher about whom he was
to leave so many curious and interesting details. He entered Trinity
College, Oxford, in 1642, but his studies were interrupted by the Civil
War. In 1646 he became a student of the Middle Temple, but was never
called to the bar. He spent much of his time in the country, and in 1649
he brought into notice the megalithic remains at Avebury. His father
died in 1652, leaving to Aubrey large estates, and with them,
unfortunately, complicated lawsuits. Aubrey, however, lived gaily, and
used his means to gratify his passion for the company of celebrities and
for every sort of knowledge to be gleaned about them. Anthony à Wood
prophesied that he would one day break his neck while running downstairs
after a retreating guest, in the hope of extracting a story from him. He
took no active share in the political troubles of the time, but from his
description of a meeting of the Rota Club, founded by James Harrington,
the author of _Oceana_, he appears to have been a theorizing republican.
His reminiscences on this subject date from the Restoration, and are
probably softened by considerations of expediency. In 1663 he became a
member of the Royal Society, and in the next year he met Joan Somner,
"in an ill hour," he tells us. This connexion did not end in marriage,
and a lawsuit with the lady complicated his already embarrassed affairs.
He lost estate after estate, until in 1670 he parted with his last piece
of property, Easton Pierse. From this time he was dependent on the
hospitality of his numerous friends. In 1667 he had made the
acquaintance of Anthony à Wood at Oxford, and when Wood began to gather
materials for his invaluable _Athenae Oxonienses_, Aubrey offered to
collect information for him. From time to time he forwarded memoranda to
him, and in 1680 he began to promise the "Minutes for Lives," which Wood
was to use at his discretion. He left the task of verification largely
to Wood. As a hanger-on in great houses he had little time for
systematic work, and he wrote the "Lives" in the early morning while his
hosts were sleeping off the effects of the dissipation of the night
before. He constantly leaves blanks for dates and facts, and many
queries. He made no attempt at a fair copy, and, when fresh information
occurred to him, inserted it at random. He made some distinction between
hearsay and authentic information, but had no pretence to accuracy, his
retentive memory being the chief authority. The principal charm of his
"Minutes" lies in the amusing details he has to recount about his
personages, and in the plainness and truthfulness that he permits
himself in face of established reputations. In 1592 he complained
bitterly that Wood had destroyed forty pages of his MS., probably
because of the dangerous freedom of Aubrey's pen. Wood Was prosecuted
eventually for insinuations against the judicial integrity of the earl
of Clarendon. One of the two statements called in question was certainly
founded on information provided by Aubrey. This perhaps explains the
estrangement between the two antiquaries and the ungrateful account that
Wood gives of the elder man's character. "He was a shiftless person,
roving and magotic-headed, and sometimes little better than crased. And
being exceedingly credulous, would stuff his many letters sent to A.W.
with follies and misinformations, which sometimes would guide him into
the paths of error."[1] In 1673 Aubrey began his "Perambulation" or
"Survey" of the county of Surrey, which was the result of many years'
labour in collecting inscriptions and traditions in the country. He
began a "History of his Native District of Northern Wiltshire," but,
feeling that he was too old to finish it as he would wish, he made over
his material, about 1695, to Thomas Tanner, afterwards bishop of St
Asaph. In the next year he published his only completed, though
certainly not his most valuable work, the _Miscellanies_, a collection
of stories on ghosts and dreams. He died at Oxford in June 1697, and was
buried in the church of St Mary Magdalene.

  Beside the works already mentioned, his papers included:
  "Architectonica Sacra," notes on ecclesiastical antiquities; and "Life
  of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury," which served as the basis of Dr
  Blackburn's Latin life, and also of Wood's account. His survey of
  Surrey was incorporated in R. Rawlinson's _Natural History and
  Antiquities of Surrey_ (1719); his antiquarian notes on Wiltshire were
  printed in _Wiltshire; the Topographical Collections of John Aubrey_,
  corrected and enlarged by J.E. Jackson (Devizes, 1862); part of
  another MS. on "The Natural History of Wiltshire" was printed by John
  Britton in 1847 for the Wiltshire Topographical Society; the
  _Miscellanies_ were edited in 1890 for the _Library of Old Authors_;
  the "Minutes for Lives" were partially edited in 1813. A complete
  transcript, _Brief Lives chiefly of Contemporaries set down by John
  Aubrey between the Years 1669 and 1696_, was edited for the Clarendon
  Press in 1898 by the Rev. Andrew Clark from the MSS. in the Bodleian,
  Oxford.

  See also John Britton, _Memoir of John Aubrey_ (1845); David Masson,
  in the _British Quarterly Review_, July 1856; Émile Montégut, _Heures
  de lecture d'un critique_ (1891); and a catalogue of Aubrey's
  collections in _The Life and Times of Anthony Wood_ ..., by Andrew
  Clark (Oxford, 1891-1900, vol. iv. pp. 191-193), which contains many
  other references to Aubrey.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] "Life of Anthony à Wood written by Himself" (_Athen. Oxon._, ed.
    Bliss).