AUBUSSON, PIERRE D' (1423-1503), grand-master of the order of St John of
Jerusalem, and a zealous opponent of the Turks, was born in 1423. He
belonged to a noble French family, and early devoted himself to the
career of a soldier in the service of the emperor Sigismund. Under the
archduke Albert of Austria he took part in a campaign against the Turks,
and on his return to France sided with the Armagnacs against the Swiss,
greatly distinguishing himself at the battle of St Jacob in 1444. He
then joined the order of the knights of Rhodes, and successfully
conducted an expedition against the pirates of the Levant and an embassy
to Charles VII. He soon rose to the most important offices in the order,
and in 1476 was elected grand-master. It was the period of the conquests
of Mahommed II., who, supreme in the East, now began to threaten Europe.
In December 1479 a large Turkish fleet appeared in sight of Rhodes; a
landing was effected, and a vigorous attack made upon the city. But in
July of the next year, being reinforced from Spain, the knights forced
the Mussulmans to retire, leaving behind them 9000 dead. The siege, in
which d'Aubusson was seriously wounded, enhanced his renown throughout
Europe. Mahommed was furious, and would have attacked the island again
but for his death in 1481. His succession was disputed between his sons
Bayezid and Jem. The latter, after his defeat by Bayezid, sought refuge
at Rhodes under a safe-conduct from the grand-master and the council of
the knights. What followed remains a stain on d'Aubusson's memory.
Rhodes not being considered secure, Jem with his own consent was sent to
France. Meanwhile, in spite of the safe-conduct, d'Aubusson accepted an
annuity of 45,000 ducats from the sultan; in return for which he
undertook to guard Jem in such a way as to prevent his design of
appealing to the Christian powers to aid him against his brother. For
six years Jem, in spite of frequent efforts to escape, was kept a close
prisoner in various castles of the Rhodian order in France, until in
1489 he was handed over to Pope Innocent VIII., who had been vying with
the kings of Hungary and Naples for the possession of so valuable a
political weapon. D'Aubusson's reward was a cardinal's hat (1489), and
the power to confer all benefices connected with the order without the
sanction of the papacy; the order of St John received the wealth of the
suppressed orders of the Holy Sepulchre and St Lazarus. The remaining
years of his life d'Aubusson spent in the attempt to restore discipline
and zeal in his order, and to organize a grand international crusade
against the Turks. The age of the Renaissance, with Alexander Borgia on
the throne of St Peter, was, however, not favourable to such an
enterprise; the death of Jem in 1495 had removed the most formidable
weapon available against the sultan; and when in 1501 d'Aubusson led an
expedition against Mytilene, dissensions among his motley host rendered
it wholly abortive. The old man's last years were embittered by chagrin
at his failure, which was hardly compensated by his success in
extirpating Judaism in Rhodes, by expelling all adult Jews and forcibly
baptizing their children. In the summer of 1503 he died.

  See P. Bouhours, _Hist. de Pierre d'Aubusson_ (Paris, 1676; Hague,
  1793; abridged ed. Bruges, 1887); G.E. Streck, _Pierre d'Aubusson,
  Grossmeister_, &c. (Chemnitz, 1873); J.B. Bury in _Cambridge Mod.
  Hist._ vol. i. p. 85, &c. (for relations with Jem).