AUCH, a city of south-western France, capital of the department of Gers,
55 m. W. of Toulouse on the Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 9294. Auch is
built on the summit and sides of a hill at the foot of which flow the
yellow waters of the Gers. It consists of a lower and upper quarter
united in several places by flights of steps. The streets are in general
steep and narrow, but there is a handsome promenade in the upper town,
laid out in the 18th century by the _intendant_ Antoine Mégret d'Etigny.
Three bridges lead from the left to the right bank of the Gers, on which
the suburb of Patte d'Oie is situated. The most interesting part of the
town lies in the old quarter around the Place Salinis, a spacious
terrace which commands an extensive view over the surrounding country.
On its eastern side it communicates with the left bank of the river by a
handsome series of steps; on its north side rises the cathedral of
Sainte-Marie. This church, built from 1489 to 1662, belongs chiefly to
the Gothic style, of which it is one of the finest examples in southern
France. The façade, however, with its two square and somewhat heavy
flanking towers dates from the 17th century, and is Greco-Roman in
architecture. Sainte-Marie contains many artistic treasures, the chief
of which are the magnificent stained-glass windows of the Renaissance
which light the apsidal chapels, and the 113 choir-stalls of carved oak,
also of Renaissance workmanship. The archbishop's palace adjoins the
cathedral; it is a building of the 18th century with a Romanesque hall
and a tower of the 14th century. Opposite the south side of the
cathedral stands the lycée on the site of a former Jesuit college. Only
scanty remains are left of the once celebrated abbey of St Orens. The
ecclesiastical seminary contains an important library with a collection
of manuscripts, and there is a public library in the Carmelite chapel, a
building of the 17th century. The former palace of the _intendants_ of
Gascony is now used as the _préfecture_. Auch is the seat of an
archbishopric, a prefect and a court of assizes, and has tribunals of
first instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a lycée,
training-colleges, a school of design, a branch of the Bank of France
and an important lunatic asylum. The manufactures include agricultural
implements, leather, vinegar and plaited sandals, and there is a trade
in brandy, wine, cattle, poultry and wool; there are quarries of
building-stone in the neighbourhood.

Auch (Elimberris) was the capital of a Celtiberian tribe, the Ausci, and
under the Roman domination was one of the most important cities in
Gaul. In the 4th century this importance was increased by the foundation
of its bishopric, and after the destruction of Eauze in the 9th century
it became the metropolis of Novempopulana. Till 732, Auch stood on the
right bank of the Gers, but in that year the ravages of the Saracens
drove the inhabitants to take refuge on the left bank of the river,
where a new city was formed. In the 10th century Count Bernard of
Armagnac founded the Benedictine abbey of St Orens, the monks of which,
till 1308, shared the jurisdiction over Auch with the archbishops--an
arrangement which gave rise to constant strife. The counts of Armagnac
possessed a castle in the city, which was the capital of Armagnac in the
middle ages. During the Religious Wars of the 16th century Auch remained
Catholic, except for a short occupation in 1569 by the Huguenots under
Gabriel, count of Montgomery. In the 18th century it was capital of
Gascony, and seat of a generality. Antoine Mégret d'Etigny, intendant
from 1751 to 1767, did much to improve the city and its commerce.