AUCKLAND, a city and seaport on the east coast of North Island, New
Zealand, in Eden county; capital of the province of its name, and the
seat of a bishop. Pop. (1906) 37,736; including suburbs, 82,101. It is
situated at the mouth of an arm of Hauraki Gulf, and is only 6 m.
distant from the head of Manukau harbour on the western coast. The
situation is extremely beautiful. The Hauraki Gulf, a great square inlet
opening northward, is studded with islands of considerable elevation;
Rangitoto, which protects the harbour, is a volcanic cone reaching
nearly 1000 ft. The isthmus on which the town stands (which position has
caused it to be likened to Corinth) can be crossed without surmounting
any great elevation, and offers a feasible canal route. A number of
small extinct volcanoes, however, appear in all directions. To the west
the Titirangi hills exceed 1400 ft. Some of the volcanic soil is barren,
but much of the district is clothed in luxuriant vegetation.

Auckland harbour, one of the best in New Zealand, is approachable by the
largest vessels at the lowest tide. There are two graving docks. Queen
Street, the principal thoroughfare, leads inland from the main dock, and
contains the majority of the public buildings. There is a small
government house, standing in beautiful grounds, adjoining Albert Park,
with plantations of oaks and pines. The government offices, art gallery
and exchange, with St Mary's cathedral (Anglican), a building in a
combination of native timbers, St Paul's and St Patrick's cathedral
(Roman Catholic), are noteworthy buildings. The art gallery and free
library contain excellent pictures, and valuable books and MSS.
presented by Sir G. Grey. The museum contains one of the best existing
collections of Maori art. There are an opera-house and an academy of
music. The Auckland University College and the grammar school are the
principal educational establishments. The parks are the Domain, with a
botanical garden, the Albert Park near the harbour, with a bronze statue
of Queen Victoria, the extensive grounds at One Tree Hill on the
outskirts, and Victoria Park on Freeman's Bay. The principal
thoroughfares are served by electric tramway. Of the suburbs, Newton,
Parnell and Newmarket are in reality outlying parts of the town itself.
Devonport, Birkenhead and Northcote are beautifully situated on the
north shore of the inlet, and are served by steam-ferries. Several other
residential suburbs lie among the hills on the mainland, such as Mount
Albert, Mount Eden and Epsom. Onehunga is a small port on Manukau
harbour, served by rail. In Parnell is the former residence of Bishop
Selwyn, who, arriving in the colony in 1842, assisted to draw up the
constitution of the Anglican church. There are many associations with
his name in the neighbourhood. The prospect over the town and its
environs from Mount Eden is justly famous. The hill is terraced with
former native fortifications.

Auckland has industries of sugar-refining, ship-building and paper-,
rope- and brick-making, and timber is worked. The town was founded as
capital of the colony in 1840 by Governor Hobson. There is communication
both south and north by rail, and regular steamers serve the ports of
the colony, the principal Pacific Islands, Australia, &c. From 1853 to
1876 Auckland was the seat of the provincial government, and until 1865
that of the central government, which was then transferred to
Wellington. The first session of the general assembly took place here in
1854. Auckland is under municipal government.