AUDE, a maritime department of southern France, formed in 1790 from part
of the old province of Languedoc. Area, 2448 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 308,327.
It is bounded E. by the Mediterranean, N. by the departments of Hérault
and Tarn, N.W. by Haute-Garonne, W. by Ariège, and S. by
Pyrénées-Orientales. The department is traversed on its western boundary
from S. to N. by a mountain range of medium height, which unites the
Pyrenees with the southern Cévennes; and its northern frontier is
occupied by the Montagne Noire, the most westerly portion of the
Cévennes. The Corbières, a branch of the Pyrenees, run in a south-west
and north-east direction along the southern district. The Aude (q.v.),
its principal river, has almost its entire length in the department, and
its lower course, together with its tributary the Fresquel, forms the
dividing line between the Montagne Noire and the Pyrenean system.

The lowness of the coast causes a series of large lagoons, the chief of
which are those of Bages et Sigean, Gruissan, Lapalme and Leucate. The
climate is warm and dry, but often sudden in its alterations. The wind
from the north-west, known as the _cers_, blows with great violence, and
the sea-breeze is often laden with pestilential effluvia from the
lagoons. The agriculture of the department is in a flourishing
condition. The meadows are extensive and well watered, and are pastured
by numerous flocks and herds. The grain produce, consisting mainly of
wheat, oats, rye and Indian corn, exceeds the consumption, and the
vineyards yield an abundant supply of both white and red wines, those of
Limoux and the Narbonnais being most highly esteemed. Truffles are
abundant. The olive and chestnut are the chief fruits. Mines of iron,
manganese, and especially of mispickel, are worked, and there are
stone-quarries and productive salt-marshes. Brewing, distilling,
cooperage, iron-founding, hat-making and machine construction are
carried on, and there are flour-mills, brick-works, saw-mills, sulphur
refineries and leather and paper works. The formerly flourishing textile
industries are now of small importance. The department imports coal,
lime, stone, salt, raw sulphur, skins and timber and exports
agricultural and mineral products, bricks and tiles, and other
manufactured goods. It is served by the Southern railway. The Canal du
Midi, following the courses of the Fresquel and the Aude, traverses it
for 76 m.; and a branch, the Canal de la Robine, which passes through
Narbonne to the sea, has a length of 24 m. The capital is Carcassonne,
and the department is divided into the four arrondissements of
Carcassonne, Limoux, Narbonne and Castelnaudary, with 31 cantons and 439
communes. It belongs to the 16th military region, and to the académie
(educational division) of Montpellier, where also is its court of
appeal. It forms the diocese of Carcassonne, and part of the province of
the archbishop of Toulouse. Carcassonne, Narbonne and Castelnaudary are
the principal towns. At Alet, which has hot springs of some note, there
are ruins of a fine Romanesque cathedral destroyed in the religious wars
of the 16th century. The extensive buildings of the Cistercian abbey of
Fontfroide, near Bizanet, include a Romanesque church, a cloister,
dormitories and a refectory of the 12th century. A curious polygonal
church of the 11th century at Rieux-Minervois, the abbey-church at St
Papoul, with its graceful cloister of the 14th century, and the remains
of the important abbey of St Hilaire, founded in the 6th century and
rebuilt from the 12th to the 15th century, are also of antiquarian
interest. Rennes-les-Bains has mineral springs of repute.