AUDIT and AUDITOR. An audit is the examination of the accounts kept by
the financial officers of a state, public corporations and bodies, or
private persons, and the certifying of their accuracy. In the United
Kingdom the public accounts were audited from very early times, though,
until the reign of Queen Elizabeth, in no very systematic way. Prior to
1559 this duty was carried out, sometimes by auditors specially
appointed, at other times by the auditors of the land revenue, or by the
auditor of the exchequer, an office established as early as 1314. But in
1559 an endeavour was made to systematize the auditing of the public
accounts, by the appointment of two auditors of the imprests. These
officers were paid by fee and did their work by deputy, but as the
results were thoroughly unsatisfactory the offices were abolished in
1785. An audit board, consisting of five commissioners, was appointed in
their place, but in order to concentrate under one authority the
auditing of the accounts of the various departments, some of which had
been audited separately, as the naval accounts, the Exchequer and Audit
Act of 1866 was passed. This statute, which sets forth at length the
duties of the audit office, empowered the sovereign to appoint a
"comptroller and auditor-general," with the requisite staff to examine
and verify the accounts prepared by the different departments of the
public service. In examining accounts of the appropriation of the
several supply grants, the comptroller and auditor-general "ascertains
first whether the payments which the account department has charged to
the grant are supported by vouchers or proofs of payments; and second,
whether the money expended has been applied to the purpose or purposes
for which such grant was intended to provide." The treasury may also
submit certain other accounts to the audit of the comptroller-general.
All public moneys payable to the exchequer (q.v.) are paid to the
"account of His Majesty's exchequer" at the Bank of England, and daily
returns of such payments are forwarded to the comptroller. Quarterly
accounts of the income and charge of the consolidated fund are prepared
and transmitted to him, and in case of any deficiency in the
consolidated fund, he may certify to the bank to make advances.

In the United States the auditing of the Federal accounts is in the
charge of the treasury department, under the supervision of the
comptroller of the treasury, under whom are six auditors, (1) for the
treasury department, (2) for the war, (3) for the interior, (4) for the
navy, (5) for the state, &c., (6) for the post office, as well as a
register and assistant register, who keep all general receipt and
expenditure ledgers; there are official auditors in most of the states
and in many cities. In practically all European countries there is a
department of the administration, charged with the auditing of the
public accounts, as the _cour des comptes_ in France, the _Rechnungshof
des deutschen Reiches_ in Germany, &c. All local boards, large cities,
corporations, and other bodies have official auditors for the purpose of
examining and checking their accounts and looking after their
expenditure. So far as regards the work which auditors discharge in
connexion with the accounts of joint-stock companies, building
societies, friendly societies, industrial and provident societies,
savings banks, &c., the word auditor is now almost synonymous with
"skilled accountant," and his duties are discussed in the article
ACCOUNTANTS.

In Scotland there is an "auditor" who is an official of the court of
session, appointed to tax costs in litigation, and who corresponds to
the English taxing-master. In France there are legal officers, called
auditors, attached to the _Conseil d'État_, whose duties consist in
drawing up briefs and preparing documents. On the continent of Europe,
lawyers skilled in military law are called "auditors" (see MILITARY
LAW).

Auditor is also the designation of certain officials of the Roman curia.
The _auditores Rotae_ are the judges of the court of the Rota (so
called, according to Hinschius, probably from the form of the panelling
in the room where they originally met). These were originally
ecclesiastics appointed to _hear_ particular questions in dispute and
report to the pope, who retained the decision in his own hands. In the
_Speculum juris_ of Durandus (published in 1272 and re-edited in 1287
and 1291) the _auditores palatii domini papae_ are cited as permanent
officials appointed to instruct the pope on questions as they arose. The
court of the Rota appears for the first time under this name in the bull
_Romani Pontificis_ of Martin V. in 1422, and the auditores by this time
had developed into a permanent tribunal to which the definitive decision
of certain disputes, hitherto relegated to a commission of cardinals or
to the pope himself, was assigned. From this time the powers of the
auditores increased until the reform of the curia by Sixtus V., when the
creation of the congregations of cardinals for specific purposes tended
gradually to withdraw from the Rota its most important functions. It
still, however, ranks as the supreme court of justice in the papal
curia, and, as members of it, the auditores enjoy special privileges.
They are prelates, and, besides the rights enjoyed by these, have others
conceded by successive popes, e.g. that of holding benefices in
plurality, of non-residence, &c. When the pope says mass pontifically
the subdeacon is always an auditor. The auditores must be in priest's or
deacon's orders, and have always been selected--nominally at
least--after severe tests as to their moral and intellectual
qualifications. They are twelve in number, and, by the constitution of
Pius IV., four of them were to be foreigners; one French, one Spanish,
one German and one Venetian; while the nomination of others was the
privilege of certain, cities. No bishop, unless _in partibus_ (see
BISHOP), may be an auditor. On the other hand, from the auditores, as
the intellectual _élite_ of the curia, the episcopate, the nunciature
and the cardinalate are largely recruited. The _auditor camerae_
(_uditore generale della reverenda camera apostolica_) is an official
formerly charged with important executive functions. In 1485, by a bull
of Innocent VIII., he was given extensive jurisdiction over all civil
and criminal causes arising in the curia, or appealed to it from the
papal territories. In addition he received the function of watching over
the execution of all sentences passed by the curia. This was extended
later, by Pius IV., to a similar executive function in respect of all
papal bulls and briefs, wherever no special executor was named. This
right was confirmed by Gregory XVI. in 1834, and the auditor may still
in principle issue letters monitory. In practice, however, this function
was at all times but rarely exercised, and, since 1847, has fallen to a
prelate _locum tenens_, who also took over the auditor's jurisdiction in
the papal states (Hinschius, _Kathol. Kirchenrecht_, i. 409, &c.).

_Auditores_ (listeners), in the early Church, was another name. for
catechumens (q.v.).