AUDLEY, THOMAS AUDLEY, BARON (c. 1488-1544), lord chancellor of England,
whose parentage is unknown, is believed to have studied at Buckingham
College, Cambridge. He was educated for the law, entered the Middle
Temple (becoming autumn reader in 1526), was town clerk of Colchester,
and was on the commission of the peace for Essex in 1521. In 1523 he was
returned to parliament for Essex, and represented this constituency in
subsequent parliaments. In 1527 he was groom of the chamber, and became
a member of Wolsey's household. On the fall of the latter in 1529, he
was made chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and the same year speaker
of the House of Commons, presiding over the famous assembly styled the
Black or Long Parliament of the Reformation, which abolished the papal
jurisdiction. The same year he headed a deputation of the Commons to the
king to complain of Bishop Fisher's speech against their proceedings. He
interpreted the king's "moral" scruples to parliament concerning his
marriage with Catherine, and made himself the instrument of the king in
the attack upon the clergy and the preparation of the act of supremacy.
In 1531 he had been made a serjeant-at-law and king's serjeant; and on
the 20th of May 1532 he was knighted, and succeeded Sir Thomas More as
lord keeper of the great seal, being appointed lord chancellor on the
26th of January 1533. He supported the king's divorce from Catherine and
the marriage with Anne Boleyn; and presided at the trial of Fisher and
More in 1535, at which his conduct and evident intention to secure a
conviction has been generally censured. Next year he tried Anne Boleyn
and her lovers, was present on the scaffold at the unfortunate queen's
execution, and recommended to parliament the new act of succession. In
1537 he condemned to death as traitors the Lincolnshire and the
Yorkshire rebels. On the 29th of November 1538 he was created Baron
Audley of Walden; and soon afterwards presided as lord steward at the
trials of Henry Pole, Lord Montacute, and of the unfortunate marquess of
Exeter. In 1539, though inclining himself to the Reformation, he made
himself the king's instrument in enforcing religious conformity, and in
the passing of the Six Articles Act. On the 24th of April 1540 he was
made a knight of the Garter, and subsequently managed the attainder of
Thomas Cromwell, earl of Essex, and the dissolution of Henry's marriage
with Anne of Cleves. In 1542 he warmly supported the privileges of the
Commons in the case of George Ferrers, member for Plymouth, arrested and
imprisoned in London, but his conduct was inspired as usual by
subservience to the court, which desired to secure a subsidy, and his
opinion that the arrest was a flagrant contempt has been questioned by
good authority. He resigned the great seal on the 21st of April 1544,
and died on the 30th, being buried at Saffron Walden, where he had
prepared for himself a splendid tomb. He received several grants of
monastic estates, including the priory of Christ Church in London and
the abbey of Walden in Essex, where his grandson, Thomas Howard, earl of
Suffolk, built Audley End, doubtless named after him. In 1542 he
re-endowed and re-established Buckingham College, Cambridge, under the
new name of St Mary Magdalene, and ordained in the statutes that his
heirs, "the possessors of the late monastery of Walden," should be
visitors of the college _in perpetuum_. _A Book of Orders for the Warre
both by Sea and Land_ (Harleian MS. 297, f. 144) is attributed to his
authorship. He married (1) Christina, daughter of Sir Thomas
Barnardiston, and (2) Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Grey, marquess of
Dorset, by whom he had two daughters. His barony became extinct at his
death.