AUFIDENA, an ancient city of the Samnites Caraceni, the site of which is
just north of the modern Alfedena,[1] Italy, a station on the railway
between Sulmona and Isernia, 37 m. from the latter. Its remains are
fully and accurately described by L. Mariani in _Monumenti dei Lincei_
(1901), 225 seq.: cf. _Notizie degli scavi_, 1901, 442 seq.; 1902, 516
seq. The ancient city occupied two hills, both over 3800 ft. above
sea-level (in the valley between were found the supposed remains of the
later forum), and the walls, of rough Cyclopean work, were over a mile
in length. A fortified outpost lay on a still higher hill to the north.
Not very much is as yet known of the city itself (though one public
building of the 5th century B.C. was excavated in 1901, and a small
sanctuary in 1902), attention having been chiefly devoted to the
necropolis which lay below it; 1400 tombs had already been examined in
1908, though this number is conjectured to be only a sixteenth of the
whole. They are all inhumation burials, of the advanced iron age, and
date from the 7th to the 4th century B.C., falling into three
classes--those without coffin, those with a coffin formed of stone
slabs, and those with a coffin formed of tiles. The objects discovered
are preserved in a museum on the spot. In the Roman period we find
Aufidena figuring as a post station on the road between Sulmo and
Aesernia, which, however, runs past Castel di Sangro, crossing the river
by an ancient bridge some 5 m. to the north-east. Castel di Sangro has
remains of ancient walls, but these are attributed to a road by Mariani,
and in any case the fortified area there was quite small, only
one-sixteenth the size of Aufidena. The attempted identification of
Castel di Sangro with Aufidena must therefore be rejected, though we
must allow that it was probably the Roman post station; the ancient
city, since its capture by the Romans in the 3rd century B.C., having
lost something of its importance.     (T. As.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] Two churches here contain paintings of interest in the history of
    Abruzzese art, and one of them, the Madonna del Campo, contained
    fragments of a temple of considerable size.