AUGEREAU, PIERRE FRANÇOIS CHARLES, duke of Castiglione (1757-1816),
marshal of France, was born in Paris in a humble station of life. At the
age of seventeen he enlisted in the carabineers and thereafter came into
note as a duellist. Having drawn his sword upon an officer who insulted
him, he fled from France and roamed about in the Levant. He served in
the Russian army against the Turks; but afterwards escaped into Prussia
and enlisted in the guards. Tiring of this, he deserted with several
others and reached the Saxon frontier. Service in the Neapolitan army
and a sojourn in Portugal filled up the years 1788-1791; but the events
of the French Revolution brought him back to his native land. He served
with credit against the Vendeans and then joined the troops opposing the
Spaniards in the south. There he rose rapidly, becoming general of
division on the 23rd of December 1793. His division distinguished itself
even more when transferred to the army of Italy; and under Bonaparte he
was largely instrumental in gaining the battle of Millesimo and in
taking the castle of Cosseria and the camp of Ceva. At the battle of
Lodi (May 10, 1796), the turning movement of Augereau and his division
helped to decide the day. But it was at Castiglione that he rendered the
most signal services. Marbot describes him as encouraging even Bonaparte
himself in the confused situation that prevailed before that battle,
and, though this is exaggerated, there is no doubt that Augereau largely
decided the fortunes of those critical days. Bonaparte thus summed up
his military qualities: "Has plenty of character, courage, firmness,
activity; is inured to war; is well liked by the soldiery; is fortunate
in his operations." In 1797 Bonaparte sent him to Paris to encourage the
Jacobinical Directors, and it was Augereau and the troops led by him
that coerced the "moderates" in the councils and carried through the
_coup d'état_ of 18 Fructidor (4th of September) 1797. He was then sent
to lead the united French forces in Germany; but peace speedily ensued;
and he bore a grudge against the Directors and Bonaparte for their
treatment of him at that time. He took no part in the _coup d'état_ of
Brumaire 1799, and did not distinguish himself in the Rhenish campaign
which ensued. Nevertheless, owing to his final adhesion to Bonaparte's
fortunes, he received a marshal's baton at the beginning of the Empire
(May 19, 1804). In the campaign of 1805 he did good service around
Constance and Bregenz, and at Jena (October 14, 1806) his corps
distinguished itself. Early in 1807 he fell ill of a fever, and at the
battle of Eylau he had to be supported on his horse, but directed the
movements of his corps with his wonted bravery. His corps was almost
annihilated and the marshal himself received a wound from which he never
quite recovered. When transferred to Catalonia, he gained some successes
but tarnished his name by cruelty. In the campaign of 1812 in Russia and
in the Saxon campaign of 1813 his conduct was little more than mediocre.
Before the battle of Leipzig (October 16, 18, 19, 1813), Napoleon
reproached him with not being the Augereau of Castiglione; to which he
replied, "Give me back the old soldiers of Italy, and I will show you
that I am." In 1814 he had command of the army of Lyons, and his
slackness exposed him to the charge of having come to an understanding
with the Austrian invaders. Thereafter he served Louis XVIII., but,
after reviling Napoleon, went over to him during the Hundred Days. The
emperor repulsed him and charged him with being a traitor to France in
1814. Louis XVIII., when restored to the throne, deprived him of his
military title and pension. He died at his estate of La Houssaye on the
12th of June 1816. In person he was tall and commanding, but his loud
and vulgar behaviour frequently betrayed the soldier of fortune.

  As authorities consult: Kock's _Mémoires de Masséna_; Bouvier,
  _Bonaparte en Italie_; Count A.F. Andréossi, _La Campagne sur le
  Mein, 1800-1801_; Baron A. Ducasse, _Précis de la campagne de l'armée
  de Lyon en 1814_; and the _Memoirs_ of Marbot.     (J. Hl. R.)