AUGSBURG, CONFESSION OF, the most important Protestant statement of
belief drawn up at the Reformation. In summoning a diet for April 1530,
Charles V. offered a fair hearing to all religious parties in the
Empire. Luther, Justus Jonas, Melanchthon and Johann Bugenhagen were
appointed to draw up a statement of the Saxon position. These "Torgau
Articles" (March 1530) tell merely why Saxony had abolished certain
ecclesiastical abuses. Melanchthon, however, soon found that, owing to
attacks by Johann Eck of Ingolstadt ("404 Articles"), Saxony must state
its position in doctrinal matters as well. Taking the Articles of
Marburg (see MARBURG, COLLOQUY OF) and of Schwabach as the point of
departure, he repudiated all connexion with heretics condemned by the
ancient church. On the 11th of May he sent the draft to Luther, who
approved it, adding that he himself "could not tread so softly and
gently." On the 23rd of June the Confession, originally intended as the
statement of Electoral Saxony alone, was discussed and signed by a
number of other Protestant princes and cities, and read before the diet
on the 25th of June. Articles 1-21 attempt to show that the Evangelicals
had deviated from current doctrine only in order to restore the pure and
original teaching of the church. In spite of significant omissions (the
sole authority of scripture; rejection of transubstantiation), the
Confession contains nothing contradictory to Luther's position, and in
its emphasis on justification by faith alone enunciates a cardinal
concept of the Evangelical churches. Articles 22-28 describe and defend
the reformation of various "abuses." On the 3rd of August, shorn of much
of its original bitterness, the so-called _Confutatio pontificia_ was
read; it well expresses the views approved in substance by the emperor
and all the Catholic party. In answer, Melanchthon was ordered to
prepare an Apology of the Confession, which the emperor refused to
receive; so Melanchthon enlarged it and published the _editio princeps_
of both Confession and Apology in 1531.

  As he felt free to make slight changes, the first edition does not
  represent the exact text of 1530; the edition of 1533 was further
  improved, while that of 1540, rearranged and in part rewritten, is
  known as the _Variata_. Dogmatic changes in this seem to have drawn
  forth no protest from Luther or Brenz, so Melanchthon made fresh
  alterations in 1542. Later, the _Variata_ of 1540 became the creed of
  the Melanchthonians and even of the Crypto-calvinists; so the framers
  of the Formula of Concord, promulgated in 1580, returned to the text
  handed in at the Diet. By mistake they printed from a poor copy and
  not from the original, from which their German text varies at over 450
  places. Their Latin text, that of Melanchthon's _editio princeps_, is
  more nearly accurate. The _textus receptus_ is that of the Formula of
  Concord, the divergent Latin and German forms being equally binding.

Acceptance of the Confession and Apology was made a condition of
membership in the Schmalkalden League. The Wittenberg Concord (1536)
and the Articles of Schmalkalden (1537) reaffirmed them. The Confession
was the ultimate source of much of the Thirty-nine Articles. The
Religious Peace of Augsburg (1555) recognized no Protestants save
adherents of the Confession; this was modified in 1648. To-day the
_Invariata_ is of symbolical authority among Lutherans generally, while
the _Variata_ is accepted by the Reformed churches of certain parts of
Germany (see Löber, pp. 79-83.)

  Editions of the received text: J.T. Müller, _Die symbolischen Bücher
  der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche_ (10th ed., Gütersloh, 1907), with
  a valuable historical introduction by Th. Kolde; Theodor Kolde, _Die
  Augsburgische Konfession_ (Gotha, 1896), (contains also the Marburg,
  Schwabach and Torgau Articles, the _Confutatio_ and the _Variata_ of
  1540). For translations of these, as well as of Zwingli's Reckoning of
  his Faith, and of the Tetrapolitan Confession, see H.E. Jacobs, _The
  Book of Concord_ (Philadelphia, 1882-83). The texts submitted to the
  emperor, lost before 1570, are reconstructed and compared with the
  _textus receptus_ by P. Tschackert, _Die unveranderte Augsburgische
  Konfession_ (Leipzig, 1901). For the genesis of the Confession, see
  Th. Kolde, _Die alteste Redaktion der Augsburger Konfession_
  (Gütersloh, 1906), also Kolde's article, "Augsburger Bekenntnis," in
  Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyklopädie_ (3rd ed., vol. ii., Leipzig, 1897).
  The standard commentary is still G.L. Plitt, _Einleitung in die
  Augustana_ (Erlangen, 1867 ff.); compare also J. Ficker, _Die
  Konfutation des Augsburgischen Bekenntnisses in ihrer ersten Gestalt_
  (Leipzig, 1891); also A. Petzold, _Die Konfutation des
  Vierstädtebekenntnisses_ (Leipzig, 1900). On its present use see G.
  Löber, _Die im evangelischen Deutschland geltenden
  Ordinationsverpflichtungen geschichtlich geordnet_ (Leipzig, 1905), 79
  ff.     (W. W. R.*)