AUGURS, in ancient Rome, members of a religious college whose duty it
was to observe and interpret the signs (auspices) of approval or
disapproval sent by the gods in reference to any proposed undertaking.
The _augures_ were originally called _auspices_, but, while _auspex_[1]
fell into disuse and was replaced by _augur_, _auspicium_ was retained
as the scientific term for the observation of signs.

The early history of the college is obscure. Its institution has been
attributed to Romulus or Numa. It probably consisted originally of three
members, of whom the king himself was one. This number was doubled by
Tarquinius Priscus, but in 300 B.C. it was only four, two places,
according to Livy (x. 6), being vacant. The Ogulnian law in the same
year increased the number to nine, five plebeian being added to the four
patrician members. In the time of Sulla the number was fifteen, which
was increased to sixteen by Julius Caesar. This number continued in
imperial times; the college itself was certainly in existence as late as
the 4th century. The office of augur, which was bestowed only upon
persons of distinguished merit and was much sought after by reason of
its political importance, was held for life. Vacancies were originally
filled by co-optation, but by the Domitian law (104) the selection was
made, by seventeen out of the thirty-five tribes chosen by lot, from
candidates previously nominated by the college. The insignia of office
were the _lituus_, a staff free from knots and bent at the top, and the
_trabea_, a kind of toga with bright scarlet stripes and a purple
border. The science of augury was contained in various written works,
which were consulted as occasion arose: such were the _libri augurum_, a
manual of augural ritual, and the _commentarii augurum_, a collection of
decrees or answers given by the college to the senate in certain
definite cases.

The natural region to look to for signs of the will of Jupiter was the
sky, where lightning and the flight of birds seemed directed by him as
counsel to men. The latter, however, was the more difficult of
interpretation, and upon it, therefore, mainly hinged the system of
divination with which the augurs were occupied. It was the duty of the
augur, before the auspices properly so called (those from the sky and
from birds) were taken, to mark out with his staff the templum or
consecrated space within which his observations were intended to be
made. The method of procedure was as follows. At midnight, when the sky
was clear and there was an absence of wind, the augur, in the presence
of a magistrate, took up his position on a hill which afforded a wide
view. After prayer and sacrifice, he marked out the templum both in the
sky and on the ground and dedicated it. Within its limits he then
pitched a tent, in which he sat down with covered head, asked the gods
for a sign, and waited for an answer. As the augur looked south he had
the east, the lucky quarter, on his left, and therefore signs on the
left side were considered favourable, those on the right unfavourable.
The practice was the reverse in Greece; the observers of signs looked
towards the north, so that signs on the right were regarded as the
favourable ones, and this is frequently adopted in the Roman poets. The
augur afterwards announced the result of his observations in a set form
of words, by which the magistrate was bound. Signs of the will of the
gods were of two kinds, either in answer to a request (_auspicia
impetrativa_), or incidental (_auspicia oblativa_). Of such signs there
were five classes: (1) Signs in the sky (_caelestia auspicia_),
consisting chiefly of thunder and lightning, but not excluding falling
stars and other phenomena. Lightning from left to right was favourable,
from right to left unfavourable; but on its mere appearance, in either
direction, all business in the public assemblies was suspended for the
day. Since the person charged to take the auspices for a certain day was
constitutionally subject to no other authority who could test the truth
or falsehood of his statement that he had observed lightning, this
became a favourite device for putting off meetings of the public
assembly. Restrictions were, however, imposed in later republican times.
When a new consul, praetor or quaestor entered on his first day of
office and prayed the gods for good omens, it was a matter of custom to
report to him that lightning from the left had been seen. (2) Signs from
birds (_signa ex avibus_), with reference to the direction of their
flight, and also to their singing, or uttering other sounds. To the
first class, called _alites_, belonged the eagle and the vulture; to the
second, called _oscines_, the owl, the crow and the raven. The mere
appearance of certain birds indicated good or ill luck, while others had
a reference only to definite persons or events. In matters of ordinary
life on which divine counsel was prayed for, it was usual to have
recourse to this form of divination. For public affairs it was, by the
time of Cicero, superseded by the fictitious observation of lightning.
(3) Feeding of birds (_auspicia ex tripudiis_), which consisted in
observing whether a bird--usually a fowl--on grain being thrown before
it, let fall a particle from its mouth (_tripudium sollistimum_). If it
did so, the will of the gods was in favour of the enterprise in
question. The simplicity of this ceremony recommended it for very
general use, particularly in the army when on service. The fowls were
kept in cages by a servant, styled _pullarius_. In imperial times
_decuriales pullarii_ are mentioned. (4) Signs from animals (_pedestria
auspicia_, or _ex quadrupedibus_), i.e. observation of the course of,
or sounds uttered by, quadrupeds and reptiles within a fixed space,
corresponding to the observations of the flight of birds, but much less
frequently employed. It had gone out of use by the time of Cicero. (5)
Warnings (_signa ex diris_), consisting of all unusual phenomena, but
chiefly such as boded ill. Being accidental in their occurrence, they
belonged to the _auguria oblativa_, and their interpretation was not a
matter for the augurs, unless occurring in the course of some public
transaction, in which case they formed a divine veto against it.
Otherwise, reference was made for an interpretation to the pontifices in
olden times, afterwards frequently to the Sibylline books, or the
Etruscan haruspices, when the incident was not already provided for by a
rule, as, for example, that it was unlucky for a person leaving his
house to meet a raven, that the sudden death of a person from epilepsy
at a public meeting was a sign to break up the assembly.

Among the other means of discovering the will of the gods were the
casting of lots, oracles of Apollo (in the hands of the college _sacris
faciundis_), but chiefly the examination of the entrails of animals
slain for sacrifice (see OMEN). Anything abnormal found there was
brought under the notice of the augurs, but usually the Etruscan
haruspices were employed for this. The persons entitled to ask for an
expression of the divine will on a public affair were the magistrates.
To the highest offices, including all persons of consular and praetorian
rank, belonged the right of taking _auspicia maxima_; to the inferior
offices of aedile and quaestor, the _auspicia minora_; the differences
between these, however, must have been small. The subjects for which
_auspicia publica_ were always taken were the election of magistrates,
their entering on office, the holding of a public assembly to pass
decrees, the setting out of an army for war. They could only be taken in
Rome itself; and in case of a commander having to renew his _auspicia_,
he must either return to Rome or select a spot in the foreign country to
represent the hearth of that city. The time for observing auspices was,
as a rule, between midnight and dawn of the day fixed for any proposed
undertaking. In military affairs this course was not always possible, as
in the case of taking auspices before crossing a river. The founding of
colonies, the beginning of a battle, the calling together an army, the
sittings of the senate, decisions of peace or war, were occasions, not
always but frequently, for taking auspices. The place where the ceremony
was performed was not fixed, but selected with a view to the matter in
hand. A spot being selected, the official charged to make the
observation pitched his tent there some days before. A matter postponed
through adverse signs from the gods could on the following or some
future day be again brought forward for the auspices. If an error
(_vitium_) occurred in the auspices, the augurs could, of their own
accord or at the request of the senate, inform themselves of the
circumstances, and decree upon it. A consul could refuse to accept their
decree while he remained in office, but on retiring he could be
prosecuted. _Auspicia oblativa_ referred mostly to the comitia. A
magistrate was not bound to take notice of signs reported merely by a
private person, but he could not overlook such a report from a brother
magistrate. For example, if a quaestor on his entry to office observed
lightning and announced it to the consul, the latter must delay the
public assembly for the day.

  On the subject generally, see A. Bouché-Leclercq, _Histoire de la
  divination dans l'antiquité_ (1879), and his articles, with
  bibliography, in Daremberg and Saglio's _Dictionnaire des antiquités_,
  also articles "Augures," "Auspicium," by Wissowa in Pauly's
  _Realencyclopädie_ (II. pt. ii., 1896), and by L.C. Purser (and
  others) in Smith's _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities_ (3rd
  ed., 1890). (See also DIVINATION, OMEN, ASTROLOGY, &c.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] There is no doubt that _auspex_ = _avi-spex_ ("observer of
    birds"), but the derivation of _augur_ is still unsettled. The
    following have been suggested: (1) _augur_ (or _augus_) is a
    substantive originally meaning "increase" (related to _augustus_ as
    _robur_ to _robustus_), then transferred to the priest as the giver
    of increase or blessing; (2) = _avi-gur_, the second part of the word
    pointing to (a) _garrire_, "chatter," or (b) _gerere_, the augur
    being conceived as "carrying" or guiding the flight of the birds; (3)
    from a lost verb _augo_ = "tell," "declare." It is now generally
    agreed that the science of augury is of Italian, not Etruscan,
    origin.