AUGUSTINIANS, in the Roman Catholic Church, a generic name for religious
orders that follow the so-called "Rule of St Augustine." The chief of
these orders are:--Augustinian Canons (q.v.), Augustinian Hermits (q.v.)
or Friars, Premonstratensians (q.v.), Trinitarians (q.v.), Gilbertines
(see GILBERT OF SEMPRINGHAM, ST). The following orders, though not
called Augustinians, also have St Augustine's Rule as the basis of their
life: Dominicans, Servites, Our Lady of Ransom, Hieronymites,
Assumptionsts and many others; also orders of women: Brigittines,
Ursulines, Visitation nuns and a vast number of congregations of women,
spread over the Old and New Worlds, devoted to education and charitable
works of all kinds.

  See Helyot, _Ordres religieux_ (1792), vols. ii., iii., iv.; Max
  Heimbucher, _Orden und Kongregationen_, i. (1896), § 66-85; Wetzer und
  Welte, _Kirchenlexicon_, i., 1665-1667.

St Augustine never wrote a Rule, properly so called; but _Ep._ 211
(_al._ 109) is a long letter of practical advice to a community of nuns,
on their daily life; and _Serm._ 355, 356 describe the common life he
led along with his clerics in Hippo. When in the second half of the 11th
century the clergy of a great number of collegiate churches were
undertaking to live a substantially monastic form of life (see CANON),
it was natural that they should look back to this classical model for
clerics living in community. And so attention was directed to St
Augustine's writings on community life; and out of them, and spurious
writings attributed to him, were compiled towards the close of the 11th
century three Rules, the "First" and "Second" being mere fragments, but
the "Third" a substantive rule of life in 45 sections, often grouped in
twelve chapters. This Third Rule is the one known as "the Rule of St
Augustine." Being confined to fundamental principles without entering
into details, it has proved itself admirably suited to form the
foundation of the religious life of the most varied orders and
congregations, and since the 12th century it has proved more prolific
than the Benedictine Rule. In an uncritical age it was attributed to St
Augustine himself, and Augustinians, especially the canons, put forward
fantastic claims to antiquity, asserting unbroken continuity, not merely
from St Augustine, but from Christ and the Apostles.

  The three Rules are printed in Dugdale, _Monasticon_ (ed. 1846), vi.
  42; and in Holsten-Brockie, _Codex Regularum_, ii. 121. For the
  literature see Otto Zöckler, _Askese und Mönchtum_ (1897), pp. 347,
  354.     (E. C. B.)