AUGUSTINIAN HERMITS, or FRIARS, a religious order in the Roman Catholic
Church, sometimes called (but improperly) Black Friars (see FRIARS). In
the first half of the 13th century there were in central Italy various
small congregations of hermits living according to different rules. The
need of co-ordinating and organizing these hermits induced the popes
towards 1250 to unite into one body a number of these congregations, so
as to form a single religious order, living according to the Rule of St
Augustine, and called the Order of Augustinian Hermits, or simply the
Augustinian Order. Special constitutions were drawn up for its
government, on the same lines as the Dominicans and other mendicants--a
general elected by chapter, provincials to rule in the different
countries, with assistants, definitors and visitors. For this reason,
and because almost from the beginning the term "hermits" became a
misnomer (for they abandoned the deserts and lived conventually in
towns), they ranked among the friars, and became the fourth of the
mendicant orders. The observance and manner of life was, relatively to
those times, mild, meat being allowed four days in the week. The habit
is black. The institute spread rapidly all over western Europe, so that
it eventually came to have forty provinces and 2000 friaries with some
30,000 members. In England there were not more than about 30 houses (see
Tables in F.A. Gasquet's _English Monastic Life_). The reaction against
the inevitable tendencies towards mitigation and relaxation led to a
number of reforms that produced upwards of twenty different
congregations within the order, each governed by a vicar-general, who
was subject to the general of the order. Some of these congregations
went in the matter of austerity beyond the original idea of the
institute; and so in the 16th century there arose in Spain, Italy and
France, Discalced or Barefooted Hermits of St Augustine, who provided in
each province one house wherein a strictly eremitical life might be led
by such as desired it.

About 1500 a great attempt at a reform of this kind was set on foot
among the Augustinian Hermits of northern Germany, and they were formed
into a separate congregation independent of the general. It was from
this congregation that Luther went forth, and great numbers of the
German Augustinian Hermits, among them Wenceslaus Link the provincial,
followed him and embraced the Reformation, so that the congregation was
dissolved in 1526.

The Reformation and later revolutions have destroyed most of the houses
of Augustinian Hermits, so that now only about a hundred exist in
various parts of Europe and America; in Ireland they are relatively
numerous, having survived the penal times. The Augustinian school of
theology (Noris, Berti) was formed among the Hermits. There have been
many convents of Augustinian Hermitesses, chiefly in the Barefooted
congregations; such convents exist still in Europe and North America,
devoted to education and hospital work. There have also been numerous
congregations of Augustinian Tertiaries, both men and women, connected
with the order and engaged on charitable works of every kind (see
TERTIARIES).

  See Helyot, _Hist. des ordres religieux_ (1792), iii.; Max Heimbucher,
  _Orden und Kongregationen_, i. (1896), § 61-65; Wetzer und Welte,
  _Kirchenlexicon_ (2nd ed.), art. "Augustiner"; Herzog,
  _Realencyklopädie_ (3rd ed.), art. "Augustiner." The chief book on the
  subject is Th. Kolde, _Die deutschen Augustiner-Kongregationen_
  (1879).     (E. C. B.)