AUGUSTUS I. (1526-1586), elector of Saxony, was the younger son of
Henry, duke of Saxony, and consequently belonged to the Albertine branch
of the Wettin family. Born at Freiberg on the 31st of July 1526, and
brought up as a Lutheran, he received a good education and studied at
the university of Leipzig. When Duke Henry died in 1541 he decreed that
his lands should be divided equally between his two sons, but as his
bequest was contrary to law, it was not carried out, and the dukedom
passed almost intact to his elder son, Maurice. Augustus, however,
remained on friendly terms with his brother, and to further his policy
spent some time at the court of the German king, Ferdinand I., in
Vienna. In 1544 Maurice secured the appointment of his brother as
administrator of the bishopric of Merseburg; but Augustus was very
extravagant and was soon compelled to return to the Saxon court at
Dresden. Augustus supported his brother during the war of the league of
Schmalkalden, and in the policy which culminated in the transfer of the
Saxon electorate from John Frederick I., the head of the Ernestine
branch of the Wettin family, to Maurice. On the 7th of October 1548
Augustus was married at Torgau to Anna, daughter of Christian III., king
of Denmark, and took up his residence at Weissenfels. But he soon
desired a more imposing establishment. The result was that Maurice made
more generous provision for his brother, who acted as regent of Saxony
in 1552 during the absence of the elector. Augustus was on a visit to
Denmark when by Maurice's death in July 1553 he became elector of
Saxony.

The first care of the new elector was to come to terms with John
Frederick, and to strengthen his own hold upon the electoral position.
This object was secured by a treaty made at Naumburg in February 1554,
when, in return for the grant of Altenburg and other lands, John
Frederick recognized Augustus as elector of Saxony. The elector,
however, was continually haunted by the fear that the Ernestines would
attempt to deprive him of the coveted dignity, and his policy both in
Saxony and in Germany was coloured by this fear. In imperial politics
Augustus acted upon two main principles: to cultivate the friendship of
the Habsburgs, and to maintain peace between the contending religious
parties. To this policy may be traced his share in bringing about the
religious peace of Augsburg in 1555, his tortuous conduct at the diet of
Augsburg eleven years later, and his reluctance to break entirely with
the Calvinists. On one occasion only did he waver in his allegiance to
the Habsburgs. In 1568 a marriage was arranged between John Casimir, son
of the elector palatine, Frederick III., and Elizabeth, a daughter of
Augustus, and for a time it seemed possible that the Saxon elector would
support his son-in-law in his attempts to aid the revolting inhabitants
of the Netherlands. Augustus also entered into communication with the
Huguenots; but his aversion to foreign complications prevailed, and the
incipient friendship with the elector palatine soon gave way to serious
dislike. Although a sturdy Lutheran the elector hoped at one time to
unite the Protestants, on whom he continually urged the necessity of
giving no cause of offence to their opponents, and he favoured the
movement to get rid of the clause in the peace of Augsburg concerning
ecclesiastical reservation, which was offensive to many Protestants. His
moderation, however, prevented him from joining those who were prepared
to take strong measures to attain this end, and he refused to jeopardize
the concessions already won.

The hostility between the Albertines and the Ernestines gave serious
trouble to Augustus. A preacher named Matthias Flacius held an
influential position in ducal Saxony, and taught a form of Lutheranism
different from that taught in electoral Saxony. This breach was widened
when Flacius began to make personal attacks on Augustus, to prophesy his
speedy downfall, and to incite Duke John Frederick to make an effort to
recover his rightful position. Associated with Flacius was a knight,
William of Grumbach, who, not satisfied with words only, made inroads
into electoral Saxony and sought the aid of foreign powers in his plan
to depose Augustus. After some delay Grumbach and his protector, John
Frederick, were placed under the imperial ban, and Augustus was
entrusted with its execution. His campaign in 1567 was short and
successful. John Frederick surrendered, and passed his time in prison
until his death in 1595; Grumbach was taken and executed; and the
position of the elector was made quite secure.

The form of Lutheranism taught in electoral Saxony was that of
Melanchthon, and many of its teachers and adherents, who were afterwards
called Crypto-Calvinists, were favoured by the elector. When Augustus,
freed from the fear of an attack by the Ernestines, became gradually
estranged from the elector palatine and the Calvinists, he seemed to
have looked with suspicion upon the Crypto-Calvinists, who did not
preach the pure doctrines of Luther. Spurred on by his wife the matter
reached a climax in 1574, when letters were discovered, which, while
revealing a hope to bring over Augustus to Calvinism, cast some
aspersions upon the elector and his wife. Augustus ordered the leaders
of the Crypto-Calvinists to be seized, and they were tortured and
imprisoned. A strict form of Lutheranism was declared binding upon all
the inhabitants of Saxony, and many persons were banished from the
country. In 1576 he made a serious but unsuccessful attempt to unite the
Protestants upon the basis of some articles drawn up at Tolgau, which
inculcated a strict form of Lutheranism. The change in Saxony, however,
made no difference to the attitude of Augustus on imperial questions. In
1576 he opposed the proposal of the Protestant princes to make a grant
for the Turkish War conditional upon the abolition of the clause
concerning ecclesiastical reservation, and he continued to support the
Habsburgs.

Much of the elector's time was devoted to extending his territories. In
1573 he became guardian to the two sons of John William, duke of
Saxe-Weimar, and in this capacity was able to add part of the county of
Henneberg to electoral Saxony. His command of money enabled him to take
advantage of the poverty of his neighbours, and in this way he secured
Vogtland and the county of Mansfeld. In 1555 he had appointed one of his
nominees to the bishopric of Meissen, in 1561 he had secured the
election of his son Alexander as bishop of Merseburg, and three years
later as bishop of Naumburg; and when this prince died in 1565 these
bishoprics came under the direct rule of Augustus.

As a ruler of Saxony Augustus was economical and enlightened. He
favoured trade by encouraging Flemish emigrants to settle in the
country, by improving the roads, regulating the coinage and establishing
the first posts. He was specially interested in benefiting agriculture,
and added several fine buildings to the city of Dresden. His laws were
numerous and comprehensive. The constitution of 1572 was his work, and
by these laws the church, the universities and the police were
regulated, the administration of justice was improved, and the raising
of taxes placed upon a better footing (see SAXONY).

In October 1585 the electress Anna died, and a few weeks later Augustus
married Agnes Hedwig, a daughter of Joachim Ernest, prince of Anhalt.
His own death took place at Dresden on the 21st of January 1586, and he
was buried at Freiberg. By his first wife he had fifteen children, but
only four of these survived him, among whom was his successor, the
elector Christian I. (1560-1591). Augustus was a covetous, cruel and
superstitious man, but these qualities were redeemed by his political
caution and his wise methods of government. He wrote a small work on
agriculture entitled _Künstlich Obstund Gartenbüchlein_.

  See C.W. Böttiger and T. Flathe, _Geschichte Sachsens_, Band ii.
  (Gotha, 1870); M. Ritter, _Deutsche Geschichte im Zeitalter der
  Gegenreformation_, Band i. (Stuttgart, 1890); R. Calinich, _Kampf und
  Untergang des Melanchthonismus in Kursachsen_ (Leipzig, 1866); J.
  Falke, _Geschichte des Kurfürsten August in volkswirtschaftlicher
  Beziehung_ (Leipzig, 1868); J. Janssen, _Geschichte des Deutschen
  Volks seit dem Ausgang des Mittelalters_ (Freiburg, 1885-1894); W.
  Wenck, _Kurfürst Moritz und Herzog August_ (Leipzig, 1874).