AUGUSTA PRAETORIA SALASSORUM (mod. _Aosta_, q.v.), an ancient town of
Italy in the district of the Salassi, founded by Augustus about 24 B.C.
on the site of the camp of Varro Murena, who subdued this tribe in 25
B.C., and settled with 3000 praetorians. Pliny calls it the last town of
Italy on the north-west, and its position at the confluence of two
rivers, at the end of the Great and Little St Bernard, gave it
considerable military importance, which is vouched for by considerable
remains of Roman buildings. The ancient town walls, enclosing a
rectangle 793 by 624 yds., are still preserved almost in their entire
extent. The walls are 21 ft. high. They are built of concrete faced with
small blocks of stone, and at the bottom are nearly 9 ft. thick, and at
the top 6 ft. There are towers at the angles of the _enceinte_, and
others at intervals, and two at each of the four gates, making a total
of twenty towers altogether. They are roughly 32 ft. square, and project
14 ft. from the wall. The Torre del Pailleron on the south and the Torre
del Leproso in the west are especially well preserved. The east and
south gates exist (the latter, a double gate with three arches flanked
by two towers, is the Porta Praetoria, and is especially fine), while
the rectangular arrangement of the streets perpetuates the Roman plan,
dividing the town into 16 blocks (_insulae_). The main road, 32 ft.
wide, divides the city into two equal halves, running from east to west,
an arrangement which makes it clear that the guarding of the road was
the main _raison d'être_ of the city. Some arcades of the amphitheatre
(the diameters of which are 282 ft. and 239 ft.), and the south wall of
the theatre are also preserved, the latter to a height of over 70 ft.,
and a market-place some 300 ft. square, surrounded by storehouses on
three sides with a temple in the centre, and two on the open (south)
side, and the _thermae_, have been discovered. Outside the town is a
handsome triumphal arch in honour of Augustus. About 5 m. to the west is
a single-arched Roman bridge, the Pondel, which has a closed passage
lighted by windows for foot passengers in winter, and above it an open
footpath, both being about 3½ ft. in width. There are considerable
remains of the ancient road from Eporedia (mod. _Ivrea_) to Augusta
Praetoria, up the Valle d' Aosta, which the modern railway follows,
notably the Pont St Martin, with a single arch with a span of 116 ft.
and a roadway 15 ft. wide, the cutting of Donnaz, and the Roman bridges
of Châtillon (Pont St Vincent) and Aosta (Pont de Pierre), &c.

  See C. Promis, _Le antichità di Aosta_ (Turin, 1862); E. Bérard in
  _Atti della Società di Archeologia di Torino_, iii. 119 seq.; _Notizie
  degli Scavi_, passim; A. d'Andrade, _Relazione dell' Ufficio Regionale
  per la consenazione dei Monumenti del Piemonte e della Liguria_
  (Turin, 1899), 46 seq.     (T. As.)