AUGUSTUS III., king of Poland, and, as FREDERICK AUGUSTUS II., elector
of Saxony (1696-1763), the only legitimate son of Augustus II. ("the
Strong"), was born at Dresden on the 17th of October 1696. Educated as a
Protestant, he followed his father's example by joining the Roman
Catholic Church in 1712, although his conversion was not made public
until 1717. In August 1719 he married Maria Josepha, daughter of the
emperor Joseph I., and seems to have taken very little part in public
affairs until he became elector of Saxony on his father's death in
February 1733. He was then a candidate for the Polish crown; and having
purchased the support of the emperor Charles VI. by assenting to the
Pragmatic Sanction, and that of the czarina Anne by recognizing the
claim of Russia to Courland, he was elected king of Poland in October
1733. Aided by the Russians, his troops drove Stanislaus Leszczynski
from Poland; Augustus was crowned at Cracow in January 1734, and was
generally recognized as king at Warsaw in June 1736. On the death of
Charles VI. in October 1740, Augustus was among the enemies of his
daughter Maria Theresa, and, as a son-in-law of the emperor Joseph I.,
claimed a portion of the Habsburg territories. In 1742, however, he was
induced to transfer his support to Maria Theresa, and his troops took
part in the struggle against Frederick the Great during the Silesian
wars, and again when the Seven Years' War began in 1756. Saxony was in
that year attacked by the Prussians, and with so much success that not
only was the Saxon army forced to capitulate at Pirna in October, but
the elector, who fled to Warsaw, made no attempt to recover Saxony,
which remained under the dominion of Frederick. When the treaty of
Hubertsburg was concluded in February 1763, he returned to Saxony, where
he died on the 5th of October 1763. He left five sons, the eldest of
whom was his successor in Saxony, Frederick Christian; and five
daughters, one of whom was the wife of Louis, the dauphin of France, and
mother of Louis XVI. Another daughter was the wife of Charles III., king
of Spain, but she predeceased her father. Augustus, who showed neither
talent nor inclination for government, was content to leave Poland under
the influence of Russia, and Saxony to the rule of his ministers. He
took great interest in music and painting, and added to the collection
of art treasures at Dresden.

  See C.W. Böttiger and T. Flathe, _Geschichte des Kurstaates und
  Königreichs Sachsen_ (Gotha, 1867-1873); R. Röpell, _Polen um die
  Mitte des 18. Jahrhunderts_ (Gotha, 1876).