AULARD, FRANÇOIS VICTOR ALPHONSE (1849-   ), French historian, was born
at Montbron in Charente in 1849. Having obtained the degree of doctor of
letters in 1877 with a Latin thesis upon C. Asinius Pollion and a French
one upon Giacomo Leopardi (whose works he subsequently translated into
French), he made a study of parliamentary oratory during the French
Revolution, and published two volumes upon _Les Orateurs de la
constituante_ (1882) and upon _Les Orateurs de la legislative et de la
convention_ (1885). With these works, which were reprinted in 1905, he
entered a fresh field, where he soon became an acknowledged master.
Applying to the study of the French Revolution the rules of historical
criticism which had produced such rich results in the study of ancient
and medieval history, he devoted himself to profound research in the
archives, and to the publication of numerous most important
contributions to the political, administrative and moral history of that
marvellous period. Appointed professor of the history of the French
Revolution at the Sorbonne, he formed the minds of students who in their
turn have done valuable work. To him we owe the _Recueil des actes du
comité de salut public_ (vol. i., 1889; vol. xvi., 1904); _La Société
des Jacobins; recueil de documents pour l'histoire du club des Jacobins
de Paris_ (6 vols., 1889-1897); and _Paris pendant la reaction
thermidorienne et sous le directoire, recueil de documents pour
l'histoire de l'esprit public à Paris_ (5 vols., 1898-1902), which was
followed by an analogous collection for Paris sous le consulat (2 vols.,
1903-1904). For the Société de l'Histoire de la Révolution Française,
which brought out under his supervision an important periodical
publication called _La Révolution française_, he produced the _Registre
des déliberations du consulat provisoire_ (1894), and _L'État de la
France en l'an VIII et en l'an IX_, with the reports of the prefects
(1897), besides editing various works or memoirs written by men of the
Revolution, such as J.C. Bailleul, Chaumette, Fournier (called the
American), Hérault de Séchelles, and Louvet de Couvrai. But these large
collections of documents are not his entire output. Besides a little
pamphlet upon Danton, he has written a _Histoire politique de la
Révolution française_ (1901), and a number of articles which have been
collected in volumes under the title _Études et leçons sur la Révolution
française_ (5 vols., 1893-1908). In a volume entitled _Taine, historien
de la Révolution française_ (1908), Aulard has submitted the method of
the eminent philosopher to a criticism, severe, perhaps even unjust, but
certainly well-informed. This is, as it were, the "manifesto" of the new
school of criticism applied to the political and social history of the
Revolution (see _Les Annales Révolutionnaires_, June 1908).

  See A. Mathiez, "M. Aulard, historien et professeur," in the _Revue de
  la Révolution française_ (July 1908).     (C. B.*)