AULIC COUNCIL (_Reichshofrat_), an organ of the Holy Roman Empire,
originally intended for executive work, but acting chiefly as a
judicature, which worked from 1497 to 1806. In the early middle ages
the emperor had already his _consiliarii_; but his council was a
fluctuating body of personal advisers. In the 14th century there first
arose an official council, with permanent and paid members, many of whom
were legists. Its business was largely executive, and it formed
something of a ministry; but it had also to deal with petitions
addressed to the king, and accordingly it acted as a supreme court of
judicature. It was thus parallel to the king's council, or _concilium
continuum_, of medieval England; while by its side, during the 15th
century, stood the _Kammergericht_, composed of the legal members of the
council, in much the same way as the Star Chamber stood beside the
English council. But the real history of the Aulic Council, as that term
was understood in the later days of the Empire, begins with Maximilian
I. in 1497-1498. In these years Maximilian created three organs
(apparently following the precedent set by his Burgundian ancestors in
the Netherlands)--a _Hofrat_, a _Hofkammer_ for finance, and a
_Hofkanzlei._ Primarily intended for the hereditary dominions of
Maximilian, these bodies were also intended for the whole Empire; and
the _Hofrat_ was to deal with "all and every business which may flow in
from the Empire, Christendom at large, or the king's hereditary
principalities." It was thus to be the supreme executive and judicial
organ, discharging all business except that of finance and the drafting
of documents; and it was intended to serve Maximilian as a _point
d'appui_ for the monarchy against the system of oligarchical committees,
instituted by Berthold, archbishop of Mainz. But it was difficult to
work such a body both for the Empire and for the hereditary
principalities; and under Ferdinand I. it became an organ for the Empire
alone (_circ._ 1558), the hereditary principalities being removed from
its cognizance. As such an imperial organ, its composition and powers
were fixed by the treaty of Westphalia of 1648. (1) It consisted of
about 20 members--a president, a vice-president, the vice-chancellor of
the Empire, and some 18 other members. These came partly from the Empire
at large, partly (and in greater numbers) from the hereditary lands of
the emperor. There were two benches, one of the nobles, one of doctors
of civil law; six of the members must be Protestants. The council
followed the person of the emperor, and was therefore stationed at
Vienna; it was paid by the emperor, and he nominated its members, whose
office terminated with his life--an arrangement which made the council
more dependent than it should have been on the emperor's will. (2) Its
powers were nominally both executive and judicial. (a) Its executive
powers were small: it gradually lost everything except the formal
business of investiture with imperial fiefs and the confirmation of
charters, its other powers being taken over by the _Geheimräte._ These
_Geheimräte_, a narrow body of secret counsellors, had already become a
determinate _concilium_ by 1527; and though at first only concerned with
foreign affairs, they acquired, from the middle of the 16th century
onwards, the power of dealing with imperial affairs in lieu of the Aulic
Council. (b) In its judicial aspect, the Aulic Council, exercising the
emperor's judicial powers on his behalf, and thus succeeding, as it
were, to the old _Kammergericht_, had exclusive cognizance of matters
relating to imperial fiefs, criminal charges against immediate vassals
of the Empire, imperial charters, Italian affairs, and cases "reserved"
for the emperor. In all other matters, the Aulic Council was a
competitor for judicial work with the Imperial Chamber[1]
(_Reichskammergericht_, a tribunal dating from the great diet of Worms
of 1495: see under IMPERIAL CHAMBER). It was determined in 1648 that the
one of these two judicial authorities which first dealt with a case
should alone have competence to pursue it. An appeal lay from the
decision of the council to the emperor, and judgment on appeal was given
by those members of the council who had not joined in the original
decision, though in important cases they might be afforced by members of
the diet. Neither the council nor the chamber could deal with cases of
outlawry, except to prepare such cases for the decision of the diet.
To-day the archives of the Aulic Council are in Vienna, though parts of
its records have been given to the German states which they concern.

  AUTHORITIES.--R. Schröder, _Lehrbuch der deutschen Rechtsgeschichte_
  (Leipzig, 1904), gives the main facts; S. Adler, _Die Organisation der
  Centralverwaltung unter Maximilian I._ (Leipzig, 1886), deals with
  Maximilian's reorganization of the Council; and J. St. Pütter,
  _Historische Entwickelung der heutigen Staatsverfassung des Teutschen
  Reichs_ (Göttingen, 1798-1799), may be consulted for its development
  and later form.     (E. Br.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The Aulic Council is the private court of the emperor, with its
    members nominated by him; the Imperial Chamber is the public court of
    the Empire, with its members nominated by the estates of the Empire.