AUMALE, a town of northern France, in the department of
Seine-Inférieure, on the left bank of the Bresle, 47 m. N.E. of Rouen on
the Northern railway. Pop. (1906) 1999. The church is an interesting
building of the 16th and 17th centuries, and has a portal attributed to
Jean Goujon. The town has glass and steel works.

The territory of Aumale (Albemarle, Aubemale, Aumerle; Lat. _Alba
Marla_) in Normandy, a dependency of the archbishopric of Rouen, was
granted to Odo of Champagne, brother-in-law of William the Conqueror,
who founded the first line of counts of Aumale. Hawise (Hadwide, Havoise
or Avoie), countess of Aumale, after the death of her first husband
William de Mandeville, earl of Essex (d. 1189), married William des
Forts (de Fors, or de Fortz; Lat. de Fortibus), a military adventurer
who had been one of the commanders of the fleet under Richard I. during
his first crusade. He died in 1195, and his widow married Baldwin de
Betun, who became count of Aumale in her right. He died in 1213, and in
1214 William de Fortibus, son of Hawise by her second husband, was
confirmed by King John in all his mother's lands. Meanwhile, however,
the territory of Aumale shared the fate of the rest of Normandy, and was
annexed to the French crown by King Philip Augustus; but the title of
earl of Albemarle, derived from it, continued to be borne in England by
William de Fortibus, and was passed on to his heirs (see ALBEMARLE).
Aumale itself was conferred by Philip Augustus as an appanage on his son
Philip. It was subsequently granted by Louis VIII. to Simon, count of
Dammartin, whose daughter, Jeanne, countess of Dammartin, transferred
it, together with the countship of Ponthieu, to the house of Castile, by
her marriage with Ferdinand III., king of Castile, called the Saint
(1238). It then remained in the possession of a branch of her
descendants bearing the name of Ponthieu, until it passed to the house
of Harcourt on the marriage of Blanche of Ponthieu with John, count of
Harcourt (1340). Marie d'Harcourt (d. 1476), heiress of Aumale, married
Anthony of Lorraine, count of Vaudémont, and Aumale was created a duchy
in the peerage of France for Claude and Francis of Lorraine in 1547. By
the marriage of Anne of Lorraine with the duke of Nemours in 1618 the
duchy of Aumale passed to the house of Savoy-Nemours. In 1686 Marie
Jeanne Baptiste, duchess of Nemours and of Aumale, and wife of Charles
Emmanuel II., duke of Savoy, sold Aumale to Louis XIV., who gave it to
his natural son, the duke of Maine. After the death of that prince, the
dukedom devolved upon his brother, the count of Toulouse, subsequently
passing to the latter's son, the duke of Penthièvre, whose daughter
married the duke of Orleans. Since the reign of Louis Philippe, king of
the French, the title of duke of Aumale has been borne by a son of the
duke of Orleans.