AUMALE, HENRI EUGÈNE PHILIPPE LOUIS D'ORLÉANS, DUC D' (1822-1897),
French prince and statesman, fifth son of Louis Philippe, duke of
Orleans, afterwards king of the French, and of Marie Amélie, princess of
the Two Sicilies, was born at Paris on the 16th of January 1822. While
still young he inherited a large fortune from the prince de Condé.
Brought up by his parents with great simplicity, he was educated at the
college of Henri IV., on leaving which at the age of seventeen he
entered the army with the rank of a captain of infantry. He
distinguished himself during the conquest of Algeria, and was appointed
governor of that colony, in which capacity he received the submission of
the amir Abd-el-Kader. After the revolution of 1848 he retired to
England and busied himself with historical and military studies,
replying in 1861 by a _Letter upon the History of France_ to Prince
Napoleon's violent attacks upon the house of Orleans. On the outbreak of
the Franco-Prussian War he volunteered for service in the French army,
but his offer was declined. Elected deputy for the Oise department, he
returned to France, and succeeded to the _fauteuil_ of the comte de
Montalembert in the French Academy. In March 1872 he resumed his place
in the army as general of division; and in 1873 he presided over the
court-martial which condemned Marshal Bazaine to death. About this
period, being appointed commandant of the VII. army corps at Besançon,
he retired from political life, and in 1879 became inspector-general of
the army. By the act of exception passed in 1883 all members of families
that had reigned in France serving in the army were deprived of their
military positions; consequently the duc d'Aumale was placed on the
unemployed supernumerary list. Subsequently, in 1886, another law was
promulgated which expelled from French territory the heads of former
reigning families, and provided that henceforward all members of those
families should be disqualified for any public position or function, and
for election to any public body. The duc d'Aumale protested
energetically, and was himself expelled. By his will of the 3rd of June
1884, however, he had bequeathed to the Institute of France his
Chantilly estate, with all the art-collection he had gathered there.
This generosity led the government to withdraw the decree of exile, and
the duke returned to France in 1889. He died at Zucco in Sicily on the
7th of May 1897. Of his marriage, contracted in 1844 with his first
cousin, Caroline de Bourbon, daughter of the prince of Salerno, were
born two sons: the prince de Condé (d. 1866), and the due de Guise (d.
1872). The due d'Aumale's principal literary work was an _Histoire des
princes de Condé_, which he left unfinished.

  See Georges Picot, _M. le duc d'Aumale_ (Paris, 1898); Ernest Daudet,
  _Le duc d'Aumale_ (Paris, 1898).     (M. P.*)