AUNGERVYLE, RICHARD (1287-1345), commonly known as RICHARD DE BURY,
English bibliophile, writer and bishop, was born near Bury St Edmunds,
Suffolk, on the 24th of January 1287. He was the son of Sir Richard
Aungervyle, who was descended from one of William the Conqueror's
soldiers, settled in Leicestershire, where the family came into
possession of the manor of Willoughby. His education was undertaken by
his uncle, John de Willoughby, and after leaving the grammar school of
his native place he was sent to Oxford, where he is said to have
distinguished himself in philosophy and theology. John Pits[1] says, but
apparently without authority, that he became a Benedictine monk. He was
made tutor to Prince Edward of Windsor (afterwards Edward III.), and,
according to Dibdin, inspired him with some of his own love of books. He
was mixed up with the sordid intrigues which preceded the deposition of
Edward II., and supplied Queen Isabella and Mortimer in Paris with money
in 1325 from the revenues of Guienne, of which province he was
treasurer. For some time he had to hide in Paris from the officers sent
by Edward II. to apprehend him. On the accession of Edward III. his
services were rewarded by rapid promotion. He was cofferer to the king,
treasurer of the wardrobe and afterwards clerk of the privy seal. The
king, moreover, repeatedly recommended him to the pope, and twice sent
him, in 1330 and 1333, as ambassador to the papal court, then in exile
at Avignon. On the first of these visits he made the acquaintance of a
fellow bibliophile in Petrarch, who records his impression (_Epist.
Famil._ lib. iii. Ep. 1) of the Englishman as "not ignorant of
literature and ... from his youth up curious beyond belief of hidden
things." He asked him for information about Thule, but Aungervyle, who
promised information when he should once more be at home among his
books, never sent any answer, in spite of repeated enquiries. The pope,
John XXII., made him his principal chaplain, and presented him with a
rochet in earnest of the first vacant bishopric in England.

During his absence from England he was made (1333) dean of Wells. In
September of the same year the see of Durham fell vacant, and the king
overruled the choice of the monks, who had elected and actually
installed their sub-prior, Robert de Graystanes, in favour of
Aungervyle. In February 1334 he was made lord treasurer, an appointment
he exchanged later in the year for that of lord chancellor. This charge
he resigned in the next year, and, after making arrangements for the
protection of his northern diocese from an expected inroad of the Scots,
he proceeded in July 1336 to France to attempt a settlement of the
claims in dispute between Edward and Philip. In the next year he served
on three commissions for the defence of the northern counties. In June
1338 he was once more sent abroad to secure peace, but within a month of
his appointment Edward himself landed in Flanders to procure allies for
his approaching campaign. Aungervyle accompanied him to Coblenz to his
meeting with the emperor Louis IV., and in the next year was sent to
England to raise money. This seems to have been his last visit to the
continent. In 1340 and 1342 he was again engaged in trying to negotiate
peace with the Scots, but from this time his life appears to have passed
quietly in the care of his diocese and in the accumulation of a library.

He sent far and wide in search of manuscripts, rescuing many treasures
from the charge of ignorant and neglectful monks. "No dearness of
price," he says, "ought to hinder a man from the buying of books, if he
has the money demanded for them, unless it be to withstand the malice of
the seller or to await a more favourable opportunity of buying." It is
to be supposed that Richard de Bury sometimes brought undue pressure to
bear on the owners, for it is recorded that an abbot of St Albans bribed
him to secure his influence for the house by four valuable books, and
that de Bury, who procured certain coveted privileges for the monastery,
bought from him thirty-two other books, for fifty pieces of silver, far
less than their normal price. The record of his passion for books, his
_Philobiblon_, was completed on his fifty-eighth birthday, the 24th of
January 1345, and he died on the 14th of April (May, according to Adam
Murimuth) of that year. He gives an account (chapter viii.) of the
unwearied efforts made by himself and his agents to collect books. In
the eighteenth chapter he records his intention of founding a hall at
Oxford, and in connexion with it a library of which his books were to
form the nucleus. He even details the rules to be observed for the
lending and care of the books, and he had already taken the preliminary
steps for the foundation. The bishop died, however, in great poverty,
and it seems likely that his collection was dispersed immediately after
his death. But the traditional account is that the books were sent to
the Durham Benedictines at Oxford, and that on the dissolution of the
foundation by Henry VIII. they were divided between Duke Humphrey of
Gloucester's library, Balliol College and Dr George Owen. Only two of
the volumes are known to be in existence; one is a copy of John of
Salisbury's works in the British Museum, and the other some theological
treatises by Anselm and others in the Bodleian.

The chief authority for the bishop's life is William de Chambre (printed
in Wharton's _Anglia Sacra_, 1691, and in _Historiae Dunelmensis
scriptores tres_, Surtees Soc. 1839), who describes him as an amiable
and excellent man, charitable in his diocese, and the liberal patron of
many learned men, among these being Thomas Bradwardine, afterwards
archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Fitzralph, afterwards archbishop of
Armagh, the enemy of the mendicant orders, Walter Burley, who translated
Aristotle, John Mauduit the astronomer, Robert Holkot and Richard de
Kilvington. John Bale[2] and Pits[3] mention other works of his,
_Epistolae Familiares_ and _Orationes ad Principes_. The opening words
of the _Philobiblon_ and the _Epistolae_ as given by Bale represent
those of the _Philobiblon_ and its prologue, so that he apparently made
two books out of one treatise. It is possible that the _Orationes_ may
represent a letter book of Richard de Bury's, entitled _Liber
Epistolaris quondam domini Ricardi de Bury, Episcopi Dunelmensis_, now
in the possession of Lord Harlech. This MS., the contents of which are
fully catalogued in the Fourth Report (1874) of the Historical MSS.
Commission (Appendix, pp. 379-397), contains numerous letters from
various popes, from the king, a correspondence dealing with the affairs
of the university of Oxford, another with the province of Gascony,
beside some harangues and letters evidently kept as models to be used on
various occasions.

It has often been asserted that the _Philobiblon_ itself was not written
by Richard de Bury at all, but by Robert Holkot. This assertion is
supported by the fact that in seven of the extant MSS. of _Philobiblon_
it is ascribed to Holkot in an introductory note, in these or slightly
varying terms: _Incipit prologus in philobiblon ricardi dunelmensis
episcopi que libru composuit Robertus holcote de ordine predicalorum sub
nomine dicti episcopi_. The Paris MS. has simply _Philobiblon olchoti
anglici_, and does not contain the usual concluding note of the date
when the book was completed by Richard. As a great part of the charm of
the book lies in the unconscious record of the collector's own
character, the establishment of Holkot's authorship would materially
alter its value. A notice of Richard de Bury by his contemporary Adam
Murimuth (_Continuatio Chronicarum_, Rolls Series, 1889, p. 171) gives a
less favourable account of him than does William de Chambre, asserting
that he was only moderately learned, but desired to be regarded as a
great scholar.

  The original Latin text was printed at Cologne (1473), Spires (1483),
  Paris (1500), Oxford (1598 and 1599), &c. It was first translated into
  English by J.B. Inglis in 1832, and into French by Hippolyte Cocheris
  in 1856. The best translation is that by Mr E.C. Thomas, accompanying
  the Latin text, with full biographical and bibliographical
  introductions (1888). Other editions are in the _King's Classics_
  (1902) and for the Grolier Club (New York, 1889, ed. A.W. West).

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] _De Ill. Angl. Script._ (1619, p. 467).

  [2] _Script. Ill. Maj. Brit._ cent. v. No. 69.

  [3] _De Ill. Angl. Script._ (1619, p. 468).