AURANGZEB (1618-1707), one of the greatest of the Mogul emperors of
Hindustan, was the third son of Shah Jahan, and was born in November
1618. His original name, Mahommed, was changed by his father, with whom
he was a favourite, into Aurangzeb, meaning ornament of the throne, and
at a later time he assumed the additional titles of Mohi-eddin, reviver
of religion, and Alam-gir, conqueror of the world. At a very early age,
and throughout his whole life, he manifested profound religious feeling
perhaps instilled into him in the course of his education under some of
the strictest Mahommedan doctors. He was employed, while very young, in
some of his father's expeditions into the country beyond the Indus, gave
promise of considerable military talents, and was appointed to the
command of an army directed against the Uzbegs. In this campaign he was
not completely successful, and soon after was transferred to the army
engaged in the Deccan. Here he gained several victories, and in
conjunction with the famous general, Mir Jumla, who had deserted from
the king of Golconda, he seized and plundered the town of Hyderabad,
which belonged to that monarch. His father's express orders prevented
Aurangzeb from following up this success, and, not long after, the
sudden and alarming illness of Shah Jahan turned his thoughts in another
direction. Of Shah Jahan's four sons, the eldest, Dara, a brave and
honourable prince, but disliked by the Mussulmans on account of his
liberality of thought, had a natural right to the throne. Accordingly,
on the illness of his father, he at once seized the reins of government
and established himself at Delhi. The second son, Shuja, governor of
Bengal, a dissolute and sensual prince, was dissatisfied, and raised an
army to dispute the throne with Dara. The keen eye of Aurangzeb saw in
this conjuncture of events a favourable opportunity for realising his
own ambitious schemes. His religious exercises and temperate habits gave
him, in popular estimation, a great superiority over his brothers, but
he was too politic to put forward his claims openly. He made overtures
to his younger brother Murad, governor of Gujarat, representing that
neither of their elder brothers was worthy of the kingdom, that he
himself had no temporal ambition, and desired only to place a fit
monarch on the throne, and then to devote himself to religious exercises
and make the pilgrimage to Mecca. He therefore proposed to unite his
forces to those of Murad, who would thus have no difficulty in making
himself master of the empire while the two elder brothers were divided
by their own strife. Murad was completely deceived by these crafty
representations, and at once accepted the offer. Their united armies
then moved northward. Meanwhile Shah Jahan had recovered, and though
Dara resigned the crown he had seized, the other brothers professed not
to believe in their father's recovery, and still pressed on. Shuja was
defeated by Dara's son, but the imperial forces under Jaswant Singh were
completely routed by the united armies of Aurangzeb and Murad. Dara in
person took the field against his brothers, but was defeated and
compelled to fly. Aurangzeb then, by a clever stroke of policy, seized
the person of his father, and threw him into confinement, in which he
was kept for the remaining eight years of his life. Murad was soon
removed by assassination, and the way being thus cleared, Aurangzeb,
with affected reluctance, ascended the throne in August 1658. He quickly
freed himself from all other competitors for the imperial power. Dara,
who again invaded Gujarat, was defeated and closely pursued, and was
given up by the native chief with whom he had taken refuge. He was
brought up to Delhi, exhibited to the people, and assassinated. Shuja,
who had been a second time defeated near Allahabad, was attacked by the
imperial forces under Mir Jumla and Mahommed, Aurangzeb's eldest son,
who, however, deserted and joined his uncle. Shuja was defeated and fled
to Arakan, where he perished; Mahommed was captured, thrown into the
fortress of Gwalior, and died after seven years' confinement. No similar
contest disturbed Aurangzeb's long reign of forty-six years, which has
been celebrated, though with doubtful justice, as the most brilliant
period of the history of Hindustan. The empire certainly was wealthy and
of enormous extent, for there were successively added to it the rich
kingdoms of Bijapur and Golconda, but it was internally decaying and
ready to crumble away before the first vigorous assault. Two causes
principally had tended to weaken the Mogul power. The one was the
intense bigotry and intolerant policy of Aurangzeb, which had alienated
the Hindus and roused the fierce animosity of the haughty Rajputs. The
other was the rise and rapid growth of the Mahratta power. Under their
able leader, Sivaji, these daring freebooters plundered in every
direction, nor could all Aurangzeb's efforts avail to subdue them. For
the last twenty-six years of his life Aurangzeb was engaged in wars in
the Deccan, and never set foot in his own capital. At the close of the
long contest the Mogul power was weaker, the Mahratta stronger than at
first. Still the personal ability and influence of the emperor were
sufficient to keep his realms intact during his own life. His last years
were embittered by remorse, by gloomy forebodings, and by constant
suspicion, for he had always been in the habit of employing a system of
espionage, and only then experienced its evil effects. He died on the
3rd of March 1707 at Ahmadnagar, while engaged on an extensive but
unfortunate expedition against the Mahrattas.

  See Lane-Poole, _Aurangzib_, "Rulers of India" series (1893).