AUREOLA, AUREOLE (diminutive of Lat. _aura_, air), the radiance of
luminous cloud which, in paintings of sacred personages, is represented
as surrounding the whole figure. In the earliest periods of Christian
art this splendour was confined to the figures of the persons of the
Godhead, but it was afterwards extended to the Virgin Mary and to
several of the saints. The aureola, when enveloping the whole body, is
generally oval or elliptical in form, but is occasionally circular or
quatrefoil. When it is merely a luminous disk round the head, it is
called specifically a _nimbus_, while the combination of nimbus and
aureole is called a _glory_. The strict distinction between nimbus and
aureole is not commonly maintained, and the latter term is most
frequently used to denote the radiance round the heads of saints, angels
or persons of the Godhead. The _nimbus_ in Christian art appeared first
in the 5th century, but practically the same device was known still
earlier, though its history is obscure, in non-Christian art. Thus
(though earlier Indian and Bactrian coins do not show it) it is found
with the gods on some of the coins of the Indian kings Kanishka,
Huvishka and Vasudeva, 58 B.C. to A.D. 41 (Gardner's _Cat. of Coins of
Greek and Scythic Kings of Bactria and India_, Brit. Mus. 1886, plates
26-29). And its use has been traced through the Egyptians to the Greeks
and Romans, representations of Trajan (arch of Constantine) and
Antoninus Pius (reverse of a medal) being found with it. In the circular
form it constitutes a natural and even primitive use of the idea of a
crown, modified by an equally simple idea of the emanation of light from
the head of a superior being, or by the meteorological phenomenon of a
halo. The probability is that all later associations with the symbol
refer back to an early astrological origin (cf. MITHRAS), the person so
glorified being identified with the sun and represented in the sun's
image; so the aureole is the _Hvareno_ of Mazdaism. From this early
astrological use the form of "glory" or "nimbus" has been adapted or
inherited under new beliefs.