AURICULA (_Primula auricula_), an Alpine plant, which has been an inmate
of British gardens for about three hundred years, and is still prized by
florists as a favourite spring flower. It loves a cool soil and shady
situation. The florists' varieties are grown in rich composts, for the
preparation of which numberless receipts have been given; but many of
the old nostrums are now exploded, and a more rational treatment has
taken their place. Thus Mr Douglas writes (_Hardy Florists' Flowers_):--

  "There is no mystery, as some suppose, about the potting, any more
  than there is about the potting material. The compost should consist
  of turfy loam four parts, leaf-mould one part, sharp river or silver
  sand one part, and a few bits of broken charcoal mixed with it. The
  pots to be used should be from 3 to 4½ in. in diameter, inside
  measure; about 1 in. of potsherds should be placed in the bottom of
  each pot, and over this some fibrous turf, from which the fine
  particles of earth have been removed. The old soil should be shaken
  from the roots of the plants to be potted; and before potting cut off,
  if necessary, a portion of the main root. In potting press the soil
  rather firmly around the roots."

Auriculas are best grown in a cold frame mounted on legs about 2 ft.
from the ground, and provided with hinged sashes. A graduated stage
formed of wood battens 6 in. broad, with a rise of 2 in., should be
fixed so as to take each one row of pots, with the plants standing at
about 15 in. from the glass; the spaces between the shelves should be
closed, while the top board of the back and the front should be hinged
so as to be let down when desired for ventilation, the sashes, too,
being movable for the same purpose, and also to afford facilities for
examining and attending to the plants. This frame should face the north
from May to October, and south in winter. No protection will be needed
except in very severe frosts, when two or three thicknesses of garden
mats may be thrown over the glass, and allowed to remain on until the
soil is thawed, should it become frozen.

Auriculas may be propagated from seed, which is to be sown as soon as
ripe, in July or August, in boxes, kept under cover, and exposed only to
the rays of the morning sun. When seed has been saved from the finer
sorts, the operation is one of considerable nicety, as it not
unfrequently happens that the best seedlings are at first exceedingly
weak. They generally flower in the second or third year, a few good
sorts being all that can be expected from a large sowing. The
established varieties are increased by taking off the offshoots, an
operation performed at the time of potting in July or the beginning of
August. But some varieties are very shy in producing offsets.

The original of the auricula is a hardy perennial herb, of dwarf habit,
bearing dull yellowish blossoms. This and the commoner forms raised from
seed, as well as one or two double forms, are interesting hardy border
flowers. The choice florists' varieties are divided into five
classes:--the _green-edged_, with the margins of the flowers green; the
_grey-edged_, with the green margins powdered with meal so as to appear
to be coloured grey; the _white-edged_, with the mealy powder so dense
as to cover the green; the _selfs_, which have none of the green
variegation of margin seen in the foregoing, but are of some distinct
colour, as purple, maroon, &c., but have, like the preceding, a white
paste surrounding the eye; and the _alpines_, which resemble the selfs
in not having any green marginal variegation, but differ in having a
yellow centre more or less dense. The individual flowers of the first
three groups of florists' auriculas show four distinct circles:--first
the eye or tube, which should have the stamens lying in it, but
sometimes has the pin-headed stigma instead, which is a defect; second,
the paste or circle of pure white surrounding the eye; third, the body
colour, a circle of some dark tint, as maroon or violet, which feathers
out more or less towards the edge, but is the more perfect the less it
is so feathered, and is quite faulty if it breaks through to the outer
circle; fourth, the margin, which is green or grey or white. These
circles should be about equal in width and clearly defined, and the
nearer they are to this standard the more perfect is the flower. In the
group of selfs the conditions are the same, except that there is no
margin, and consequently the body colour, which should be uniform in
tone, extends to the edge. In the alpines there should be no paste or
white surrounding the eye, but this space should be either golden-yellow
or creamy-yellow, which makes two subdivisions in this group; and the
body colour is more or less distinctly shaded, the edges being of a
paler hue. There is besides a group of laced alpines, in which a
distinct and regular border of colour surrounds each of the marginal
lobes.

The following is a selection of the best varieties cultivated in 1909:--

  _Green-edged._--Abbé Liszt, Abraham Barker, Shirley Hibberd, Prince
  Charming, Mrs Henwood.

  _Grey-edged._--Amy Robsart, George Lightbody, Marmion, Olympus, George
  Rudd, Richard Headly.

  _White-edged._--Acme, Conservative, Heather Bell, Mrs Dodson, Rachel,
  Smiling Beauty.

  _Selfs._--Andrew Miller, Gerald, Mikado, Mrs Phillips, Mrs Potts,
  Harrison Weir.

  _Alpines._--Argus, Dean Hole, Duke of York, Firefly, Flora Mclvor, Mrs
  Douglas, Mrs Markham, Perfection, Phyllis, Rosy Morn, The Bride,
  Teviotdale.