AURORA (perhaps through a form _ausosa_ from Sansk. _ush_, to burn; the
common idea of "brightness" suggests a connexion with _aurum_, gold),
the Roman goddess of the dawn, corresponding to the Greek goddess Eos.
According to Hesiod (_Theog_. 271) she was the daughter of the Titan
Hyperion and Thea (or Euryphassa), and sister of Helios and Selene. By
the Titan Astraeus, she was the mother of the winds Zephyrus, Notus and
Boreas, of Hesperus and the stars. Homer represents her as rising every
morning from the couch of Tithonus (by whom she was the mother of
Emathion and Memnon), and drawn out of the east in a chariot by the
horses Lampus and Phaëthon to carry light to gods and men (_Odyssey_,
xxiii. 253); in Homer, she abandons her course when the sun is fully
risen (or at the latest at mid-day, _Iliad_, ix. 66), but in later
literature she accompanies the sun all day and thus becomes the goddess
of the daylight. From the roseate shafts of light which herald the dawn,
she bears in Homer the epithet "rosy-fingered." The conception of a
dawn-goddess is common in primitive religions, especially in the Vedic
mythology, where the deity Usás is closely parallel to the Greco-Roman;
see Paul Regnaud, _Le Rig-Véda_ in _Annales du musée Guimet_, vol. i. c.
6 (Paris, 1892). She is also represented as the lover of the hunter
Orion (_Odyssey_, v. 121), the representative of the constellation that
disappears at the flush of dawn, and the youthful hunter Cephalus, by
whom she was the mother of Phaëthon (Apollodorus iii. 14. 3). In works
of art, Eos is represented as a young woman, fully clothed, walking fast
with a youth in her arms; or rising from the sea in a chariot drawn by
winged horses; sometimes, as the goddess who dispenses the dews of the
morning, she has a pitcher in each hand. In the fresco-painting by Guido
Reni in the Rospigliosi palace at Rome, Aurora is represented strewing
flowers before the chariot of the sun. Metaphorically the word Aurora
was used (e.g. Virg. _Aen_. viii. 686, vii. 606) for the East generally.