AUROCHS (from Lat. _urus_, the wild ox, and "ox") or URUS, the name of
the extinct wild ox of Europe (_Bos taurus primigenius_), which after
the disappearance of that animal became transferred to the bison.
According to the German Freiherr von Herberstein (1486-1566), in his
_Moscovia_, of which an Italian translation was published at Venice in
1550, the aurochs survived in Poland (and probably also in Hungary)
during the latter middle ages. In this work appear woodcuts--rude but
characteristic and unmistakable--of two distinct types of European wild
cattle; one the aurochs, or ur, and the other the bison. As Herberstein
had travelled in Poland, it is probable that he had seen both species
alive, and the drawings were most likely executed under his own
direction. It has indeed been suggested that the figure of the aurochs
was taken from a domesticated ox, but this is a mistaken idea. Not the
least important feature of the work of Herberstein is the application of
the name aurochs to the wild ox, as distinct from the bison. The
locality where aurochs survived in Herberstein's time was the forest of
Jaktozowka, situated about 55 kilometres west-south-west of Warsaw, in
the provinces of Bolemow and Sochaczew. From other evidence it appears
that the last aurochs was killed in this forest in the year 1627.
Herberstein describes the colour of the aurochs as black, and this is
confirmed by another old picture of the animal. Gesner's figure of the
aurochs, or as he calls it "thur," given in the _Icones_ to his _History
of Animals_, was probably adapted from Herberstein's. It may be added
that an ancient gold goblet depicts the hunting and taming of the wild
aurochs.

As a wild animal, then, the aurochs appears to have ceased to exist in
the early part of the 17th century; but as a species it survives, for
the majority of the domesticated breeds of European cattle are its
descendants, all diminished in point of size, and some departing more
widely from the original type than others. Aurochs' calves were in all
probability captured by the early inhabitants of Britain and the
continent and tamed; and from these, with perhaps an occasional blending
of wild blood, are descended most European breeds of cattle.

Much misconception, however, has prevailed as to which breeds are the
nearest to the ancestral wild stock. At one time this position was
supposed to be occupied by the white half-wild cattle of Chillingham and
other British parks. These white breeds are, however, partial albinos;
and such semi-albinos are always the result of domestication and could
not have arisen in the wild state. Moreover, park-cattle display
evidence of their descent from dark-coloured breeds by the retention of
red or black ears and brown or black muzzles. In the Chillingham cattle
the ears are generally red, although sometimes black, and the muzzle is
brown; while in the breed at Cadzow Chase Lanarkshire, both ears and
muzzle are black, and there are usually flecks of black on the head and
forequarters. It is further significant that, in the Chillingham herd,
dark-coloured calves, which are weeded out, make their appearance from
time to time.

A very ancient British breed is the black Pembroke; and when this breed
tends to albinism, the ears and muzzle, and more rarely the fetlocks,
remain completely black, or very dark grey, although the colour
elsewhere is whitish, more or less flecked and blotched with pale grey.
In the shape and curvature of the horns, which at first incline outwards
and forwards, and then bend somewhat upwards and inwards, this breed of
cattle resembles the aurochs and the (by comparison) dwarfed
park-breeds. Moreover, in both the Pembroke and the park-breeds the
horns are light-coloured with black tips.

Evidence as to the affinity between these breeds is afforded by the fact
that a breed of cattle very similar to that at Chillingham was found in
Wales in the 10th century; these cattle being white with red ears.
Individuals of this race survived till at least 1850 in Pembroke, where
they were at one time kept perfectly pure as a part of the regular
farm-stock. Until a period comparatively recent, they were relatively
numerous, and were driven in droves to the pasturages of the Severn and
the neighbouring markets. Their whole essential characters are the same
as those of the cattle at Chillingham. Their horns are white, tipped
with black, and extended and turned upwards in the manner distinctive of
the park-breed. The inside of the ears and the muzzle are black, and the
feet are black to the fetlock joint. The skin is unctuous and of a
deep-toned yellow colour. Individuals of the race were sometimes born
entirely black, and then were not to be distinguished from the common
Pembroke cattle of the mountains.

It is thus evident that park-cattle are an albino offshoot from the
ancient Pembroke black breed, which, from their soft and well-oiled
skins, are evidently natives of a humid climate, such as that of the
forests in which dwelt the wild aurochs. This disposes of a theory that
they are descendants of a white sacrificial breed introduced into
Britain by the ancient Romans.

The Pembroke and park-cattle are, however, by no means the sole
descendants of the aurochs, the black Spanish fighting-bulls claiming a
similar descent. This breed shows a light-coloured line along the spine,
which was characteristic of the aurochs. It has also been suggested that
the Swiss Siemental cattle are nearly related to the aurochs. The latter
was a gigantic animal, especially during the Pleistocene period; the
skulls and limb-bones discovered in the brick-earths and gravels of the
Thames valley and many other parts of England having belonged to animals
that probably stood six feet at the shoulder.     (R. L.*)