AUSCULTATION (from Lat. _auscultare_, to listen), a term in medicine,
applied to the method employed by physicians for determining, by the
sense of hearing, the condition of certain internal organs. The ancient
physicians appear to have practised a kind of auscultation, by which
they were able to detect the presence of air or fluids in the cavities
of the chest and abdomen. Still no general application of this method of
investigation was resorted to, or was indeed possible, till the advance
of the study of anatomy led to correct ideas regarding the locality,
structure and uses of the various organs of the body, and the
alterations produced in them by disease. In 1761 Leopold Auenbrugger
(1722-1809), a Viennese physician, published his _Inventum Novum_,
describing the art of percussion in reference more especially to
diseases of the chest. This consisted in tapping with the fingers the
surface of the body, so as to elicit sounds by which the comparative
resonance of the subjacent parts or organs might be estimated.
Auenbrugger's method attracted but little attention till the French
physician J.N. Corvisart (1755-1828) in 1808 demonstrated its great
practical importance, and then its employment in the diagnosis of
affections of the chest soon became general. Percussion was originally
practised in the manner above mentioned (_immediate percussion_), but
subsequently the method of _mediate percussion_ was introduced by P.A.
Piorry (1794-1879). It is accomplished by placing upon the spot to be
examined some solid substance, upon which the percussion strokes are
made with the fingers. For this purpose a thin oval piece of ivory
(called a _pleximeter_, or stroke-measurer) may be used, with a small
hammer; but one or more fingers of the left hand applied flat upon the
part answer equally well, and this is the method which most physicians
adopt. Percussion must be regarded as a necessary part of auscultation,
particularly in relation to the examination of the chest; for the
physician who has made himself acquainted with the normal condition of
that part of the body in reference to percussion is thus able to
recognize by the ear alterations of resonance produced by disease. But
percussion alone, however important in diagnosis, could manifestly
convey only limited and imperfect information, for it could never
indicate the nature or extent of functional disturbance.

In 1819 the distinguished French physician R.T.H. Laënnec (1781-1826)
published his _Traité de L'auscultation médiate_, embodying the present
methods of auscultatory examination, and venturing definite conclusions
based on years of his own study. He also invented the stethoscope
([Greek: staethos], the breast, and [Greek: skopein], to examine). Since
then many men have widened the scope of auscultation, notably Skoda,
Wintrich, A. Geigel, Th. Weber and Gerhardt. According to Laënnec the
essential of a good stethoscope was its capability of intensifying the
tone vibrations. But since his time the opinion of experts on this
matter has somewhat changed, and there are now two definite schools. The
first and older condemns the resonating stethoscope, maintaining that
the tones are bound to be altered; the second and younger school warmly
advocates its use. In America, more than elsewhere, there is a type of
phonendoscope much used by the younger men, which has the advantage that
it can be used when the older type of instrument fails, viz. when the
patient is recumbent and too ill to be moved. By slipping it beneath the
patient's back a fairly accurate idea of the breathing over the bases of
the lungs behind can often be obtained.

Stethoscopes have been made of many forms and materials. They usually
consist of a hollow stem of wood, hard rubber or metal, with an enlarged
tip slightly funnel-shaped at one end, and an ear-plate with a hole in
the middle, fastened perpendicularly to the other end. To enable the
instrument to be more conveniently carried, the ear-plate can be
unscrewed from the tube. The length of the stem of the instrument is of
minor importance, but its bore should be as nearly as possible that of
the entrance of the external ear. A flexible stethoscope in general use
both in England and America transmits the sound from a funnel through
tubes to the ears of the observer. This is the common form of a binaural
resonating stethoscope. It is convenient and gives a loud tone, but is
condemned by the older school, who say that the resonance is confusing,
and that the slightest movement in handling gives rise to perplexing
murmurs. Nevertheless, it is this form of instrument which has by far
the greatest vogue. It is probable, however, that the most skilled
physicians of all find a special use in each form, the monaural
non-resonating type being more sensitive to high-pitched sounds, and of
greater assistance in differentiating the sounds and murmurs of the
heart, the ordinary binaural form being more useful in examining the
lungs and other organs. In using the stethoscope, it must be applied
very carefully, so that the edge of the funnel makes an air-tight
connexion with the skin, and in the monaural form the ear must be but
lightly applied to the ear-plate, not pressing heavily on the patient.

The numerous diseases affecting the lungs can now be recognized and
discriminated from each other with a precision which, but for
auscultation and the stethoscope, would have been altogether
unattainable. The same holds good in the case of the heart, whose varied
and often complex forms of disease can, by auscultation, be identified
with striking accuracy. But in addition to these its main uses,
auscultation is found to render great assistance in the investigation of
many obscure internal affections, such as aneurysms and certain diseases
of the oesophagus and stomach. To the accoucheur the stethoscope yields
valuable aid in the detection of some forms of uterine tumours, and
especially in the diagnosis of pregnancy--the only evidence now accepted
as absolutely diagnostic of that condition being the hearing of the
foetal heart sounds.