AUSTRASIA. The word _Austria_ signifies the realm of the east (Ger. _Ost
Reich_). In Gregory of Tours this word is still used vaguely, but the
sense of it is gradually defined, and finally the name of _Austria_ or
_Austrasia_ was given to the easternmost part of the Frankish kingdom.
It usually had Metz for its capital, and the inhabitants of the kingdom
were known as the _Austrasii_. Retrospectively, later historians have
given this name to the kingdom of Theuderich I. (511-534), of his son
Theudebert (534-548), and of his grandson Theudebald (548-555); then,
after the death of Clotaire I., to the kingdom of Sigebert (561-575),
and of his son Childebert (575-597). They have even tried to interpret
the long struggle between Fredegond and Brunhilda as a rivalry between
the two kings of Neustria and Austrasia. When these two words are at
last found in the texts in their precise signification, Austrasia is
applied to that part of the Frankish kingdom which Clotaire II.
entrusted to his son Dagobert, subject to the guardianship of Pippin and
Arnulf (623-629), and which Dagobert in his turn handed on to his son
Sigebert (634-639), under the guardianship of Cunibert, bishop of
Cologne, and Ansegisel, mayor of the palace. After the death of
Dagobert, Austrasia and Neustria almost always had separate kings, with
their own mayors of the palace, and then there arose a real rivalry
between these two provinces, which ended in the triumph of Austrasia.
The Austrasian mayors of the palace succeeded in enforcing their
authority in the western as well as in the eastern part, and in
re-establishing to their own advantage the unity of the Frankish
kingdom. The mayor Pippin the Short was even powerful enough to take the
title of king over the whole.

At the time of Charlemagne, the word Austrasia underwent a change of
meaning and became synonymous with _Francia orientalis_, and was applied
to the Frankish dominions beyond the Rhine (Franconia). This Franconia
was in 843 included in the kingdom of Louis the German, and was then
increased by the addition of the territories of Mainz, Spires and Worms,
on the right bank of the river.

  See A. Huguenin, _Histoire du royaume mérovingien d'Austrasie_ (Paris,
  1857); Aug. Digot, _Histoire du royaume d'Austrasie_, 4 vols. (Nancy,
  1863); L. Drapeyron, _Essai sur l'origine, le développement et les
  résultats de la lutte entre la Neustrie et l'Austrasie_ (Paris, 1867);
  Auguste Longnon, _Atlas historique_, 1st and 2nd parts.     (C. Pf.)