AUSTIN, JOHN (1790-1859), English jurist, was born on the 3rd of March
1790. His father was the owner of flour mills at Ipswich and in the
neighbourhood, and was in good circumstances. John was the eldest of
five brothers. One of his brothers, Charles (1799-1874), obtained great
distinction at the bar. John Austin entered the army at a very early
age; he is said to have been only sixteen. He served with his regiment
under Lord William Bentinck in Malta and Sicily. He seems to have liked
his profession, and to have joined in the amusements and even in the
follies of his brother officers. Yet it appears from a journal kept by
him at the time that he occupied himself with studies of a far more
serious kind than is common amongst young officers in the army. He notes
having read in the course of one year Dugald Stewart's _Philosophical
Essays_, Drummond's _Academical Questions_, Enfield's _History of
Philosophy_, and Mitford's _History of Greece_, and upon all of these he
makes observations which disclose much thought and a capacity for
criticism which must have come from extensive reading elsewhere. The
prevailing note of this journal is one of bitter self-depreciation. He
says in it that the retrospect of the past year (1811) "has hardly given
rise to one single feeling of satisfaction," and farther on he says that
"indolence, always the prominent vice of my character," has "assumed
over me an empire I almost despair of shaking off." It is difficult to
believe that a man only just of age, whose serious reading consisted of
such books, and who (as appears from the same journal) was in the habit
of turning to the classics as an alternative, could have deserved the
reproach of indolence.

In 1812, he resigned his commission in the army, and returned home. He
then began to read law in the chambers of a barrister. He was called to
the bar in the year 1818, and joined the Norfolk circuit, but he never
obtained any large practice, and he finally retired from the bar in
1825. In 1819 he married Sarah Taylor (see AUSTIN, SARAH).

Although Austin had failed to attain success at the bar it was not long
before he had an opportunity of exercising his abilities and in a manner
peculiarly suited to his particular turn of mind. In 1826 a number of
eminent men were engaged in the foundation of University College, and it
was determined to establish in it a chair of jurisprudence. This chair
was offered to Austin and he agreed to accept it. As he was not called
upon to begin his lectures immediately, he resolved to proceed to
Germany in order to prepare himself for his duties by studying the
method of legal teaching pursued at German universities. He resided
first at Heidelberg, and afterwards at Bonn, where he lived on terms of
intimacy with such distinguished lawyers as Savigny and K.J.A.
Mittermaier; and such eminent men of letters as Niebuhr, Brandis,
Schlegel and A.W. Heffter. He began lecturing in 1828, and at first was
not without encouragement. His class was a peculiarly brilliant one. It
included a number of men who afterwards became eminent in law, politics
and philosophy--Sir George Cornewall Lewis, Charles Buller, Charles
Villiers, Sir Samuel Romilly and his brother Lord Romilly, Edward Strutt
afterwards Lord Belper, Sir William Erie and John Stuart Mill were all
members of his class. All of these have left on record expressions of
the profound admiration which the lectures excited in the minds of those
who heard them. But the members of his class, though exceptional in
quality, were few in number, and as there was no fixed salary attached
to the professorship, Austin could not afford to remain in London, and
in 1832 he resigned. In that year he published his _Province of
Jurisprudence determined_, being the first ten of his delivered lectures
compressed into six.

There is ample testimony that Austin's lectures were very highly
appreciated by those who heard them. Their one fault was that they were
over-elaborated. In his desire to avoid ambiguity, he repeats his
explanations and qualifications to an extent which must have tired his
hearers. Nevertheless the lectures excited an admiration which almost
amounted to enthusiasm. Nor was Austin's influence confined to his
lectures. Sir William Erle says in a letter written to him in 1844, "The
interchange of mind with you in the days of Lincoln's Inn I regard as a
deeply important event in my life, and I ever remember your friendship
with thankfulness and affection." John Stuart Mill, whose views on
political subjects were entirely opposed to those of Austin, spoke of
him after his death as the man "to whom he (Mill) had been
intellectually and morally most indebted," and he expressed the opinion
"that few men had contributed more by their individual influence, and
their conversation, to the formation and growth of the most active minds
of the generation."

In 1833 a royal commission was issued to draw up a digest of criminal
law and procedure. Of this commission Austin was a member. The first
report was signed by all the commissioners, and was presented in June
1834. Nevertheless it appears from some notes made at the time that
Austin, though he thought it his duty to sign the report, strongly
objected to some passages which it contained. It is pretty obvious from
the nature of these objections that nothing would have satisfied him
short of a complete recasting of the criminal law, whereas what the
commissioners were ordered to produce was not a code but a digest.
Probably Austin felt, as Mr Justice Wills felt some years later, that
the anomalies which a code would remove would "choke a digest."

In 1834 the benchers of the Inner Temple appointed Austin to give
lectures on the "General Principles of Jurisprudence and International
Law." He delivered a few lectures in the spring of that year, but in
June the course was by order of the benchers suspended on account of the
smallness of the attendance, and it was never resumed. He then went to
live with his wife and only child Lucie (afterwards Lady Duff-Gordon) at
Boulogne. Here he remained for about a year and a half. He then accepted
an appointment offered him by Sir James Stephen to go as royal
commissioner to Malta in conjunction with Mr (afterward Sir George)
Cornewall Lewis, to inquire into the nature and extent of the grievances
of which the natives of that island complained.

The Austins remained in Malta until July 1838. After their return they
lived a good deal abroad, and in 1844 they settled in Paris, where they
remained until driven out of France by the revolution of 1848. They then
took a house at Weybridge, and there Austin remained until his death in
December 1859. He was urged by his friends to publish a second edition
of the _Province of Jurisprudence_, which was then out of print, and he
went so far as to allow a prospectus to be issued by Mr Murray of an
extended work on "The Principles and Relations of Jurisprudence and
Ethics." But nothing came of it.

In 1842 Austin published in the _Edinburgh Review_ an attack upon
Friedrich List's system of trade protection (_Das nationale System der
politischen Okonomie_). And in 1859 he published a pamphlet entitled "A
Plea for the Constitution." This was occasioned by the publication of
Lord Grey's essay on "Parliamentary Government." Its main object was to
show that the consequences to be anticipated from Parliamentary Reform
were all of them either impossible of realization or mischievous. He
thought any attempt on the part of the poorer classes to improve their
position was barred by the inexorable laws of political economy; and
that if they obtained power they would only use it to plunder the rich;
whilst, on the other hand, he seems not to have had any suspicion that
the "proprietary class" were likely to disregard the interests of the
poor. He thinks that political power is safest in the hands of those
possessed of hereditary or acquired property; and that without property
even intelligence and knowledge afford no presumption of political
capacity. Undoubtedly Austin was a utilitarian in the Benthamite sense,
and remained so to the end of his life. It must be remembered that
Bentham's sole and immutable test of human action was the greatest
happiness of the greatest number. This is a principle which an
aristocrat may adopt if he chooses, no less than a democrat; an
individualist no less than a socialist; and there is nothing in the
"Plea for the Constitution" which contravenes this. But Austin thought,
and in this no doubt he differed from Bentham, that the mass of the
people did not know their own interests so well as "an aristocracy of
independent gentlemen" who might be trusted to provide for the wants of
all classes alike.

Austin's position as a jurist is much more difficult to estimate. Twice
his influence appeared likely to produce some impression upon English
law, but upon both occasions it lasted only a short time, and never
extended very far. The men whom he influenced were very eminent, but in
numbers they were few. As a rule, students for the bar never at any time
paid any attention to his teaching. The first published lectures were
almost forgotten when Mr (afterwards Sir Henry) Maine was appointed to
lecture on jurisprudence at the Inner Temple. Both in his private and
public lectures Maine constantly urged upon his hearers the importance
of Austin's analytical inquiries into the meaning of legal terms. He
used to say that it was Austin's inquiries which had made a philosophy
of law possible. Undoubtedly Maine's influence revived for a short time
the interest in Austin's teaching. Maine was lecturing about the time of
Austin's death, and in 1861 Mrs Austin published a second edition of the
_Province of Jurisprudence_, and this was followed soon after by two
volumes which contained in addition in a fragmentary form the remaining
lectures delivered at University College and other notes (_Lectures on
Jurisprudence; or The Philosophy of Positive Law_).

It cannot be said that Austin's views of jurisprudence have had, as yet,
any visible influence whatever on the study of English law. But if we
consider what it was that Austin endeavoured to teach, it can hardly be
said that the subject is one which a lawyer can with impunity neglect.
He proposes to distinguish law from morals; to explain the notions
which have been entertained of duty, right, liberty, injury, punishment
and redress; and their connexion with, and relations to, sovereignty; to
examine the distinction between rights _in rem_ and rights _in
personam_, and between rights _ex contractu_ and rights _ex delicto_;
and further to determine the meaning of such terms as right, obligation,
injury, sanction, person, thing, act and forbearance. These are some of
the terms, notions and distinctions which Austin endeavoured to explain.
They are daily in the mouth of every practising lawyer. The only portion
of Austin's work which has attracted much attention of recent years is
his conception of sovereignty, and his dictum that all laws properly so
called must be considered as sanctioned expressly or tacitly by the
sovereign. This has been indignantly denied. It has been considered
enough to justify this denial to point out that there are in existence
states where the seat of sovereignty, and the ultimate source of law,
cannot be accurately indicated. But this criticism is entirely
misplaced; for as pointed out by Maine (_Early History of Institutions_,
Lecture xii.), in an elaborate discussion of Austin's views, which in
the main he accepts, what Austin was engaged upon was not an inquiry
into the nature of sovereignty as it is found to exist, but an inquiry
into what was the connexion between the various forms of political
superiority. And this inquiry was undertaken in order to enable him to
distinguish the province of jurisprudence properly so called from the
province of morality; an inquiry which was hopeless unless the connexion
just stated was clearly conceived. Austin's views of sovereignty,
therefore, was an abstraction, useless it is true for some purposes, but
by no means useless for others. "There is," as Maine says, "not the
smallest necessity for accepting all the conclusions of these great
writers (i.e. Bentham and Austin) with implicit deference, but there
is the strongest necessity for knowing what these conclusions are. They
are indispensable, if for no other object, for the purpose of clearing
the head." These last words exactly express the work which Austin set
himself to do. It was to clear his own head, and the heads of his
hearers, that he laboured so hard. As Austin once said of himself, his
special vocation was that of untying intellectual knots. The
disentangling of classifications and distinctions, the separation of
real from accidental distinctions, the analysis of ideas confusedly
apprehended, these (as has been truly said) were the characteristics of
Austin's work which specially distinguished him. Austin thought that
this somewhat irksome task was a necessary preliminary both to the study
of law as a science, and to the production of a code. It is a curious
reflection that whilst the lectures in which these inquiries were begun
(though not completed) excited the admiration of his contemporaries,
hardly any one now thinks such inquiries worth pursuing.

  The _Lectures on Jurisprudence_ were reviewed by J.S. Mill in the
  _Edinburgh Review_ of October 1863, and this review is republished in
  Mill's _Dissertations and Discussions_, vol. 3, p. 206. Professor
  Jethro Brown has published (1906) an edition of Austin's earlier
  lectures, in which they are stated in an abbreviated form. There is a
  sketch of his life by his widow in the preface to the _Lectures on
  Jurisprudence_, which she published after his death.     (W. Ma.)