AUSTIN, STEPHEN FULLER (1793-1836), American pioneer, was born in
Austinville, Wythe county, Virginia, on the 3rd of November 1793. He was
the son of Moses Austin (1767-1821), a native of Durham, Connecticut,
who in 1820 obtained from Mexico a grant of land for an American colony
in Texas, but died before he could carry out his project. The son was
educated in New London, Connecticut, and at Transylvania University,
Lexington, Kentucky, and settled in Missouri, where he was a member of
the territorial legislature from 1813 to 1819. In 1819 he removed to
Arkansas Territory, where he was appointed a circuit judge. After his
father's death he obtained a confirmation of the Texas grants from the
newly established Mexican government, and in 1821-1823 he established a
colony of several hundred American families on the Brazos river, the
principal town being named, in his honour, San Felipe de Austin. He was
a firm defender of the rights of the Americans in Texas, and in 1833 he
was sent to the city of Mexico to present a petition from a convention
in Texas praying for the erection of a separate state government. While
there, despairing of success for his petition, he wrote home
recommending the organization of a state without waiting for the consent
of the Mexican congress. This letter falling into the hands of the
Mexican government, Austin, while returning home, was arrested at
Saltillo, carried as a prisoner back to Mexico, and imprisoned for a
year without trial. Returning to Texas in 1835, he found the Texans in
armed revolt against Mexican rule, and was chosen commander-in-chief of
the revolutionary forces, but after failing to take San Antonio he
resigned the command, for which he had never considered himself fitted,
and in November 1835 went to the United States as a commissioner to
secure loans and supplies, and to learn the position the United States
authorities would be likely to take in the event of a declaration of
Texan independence. He succeeded in raising large sums, and received
assurances that satisfied him that Americans would look with great
favour on an independent Texas. Returning to Texas in the summer of
1836, he became a candidate, rather reluctantly, for the presidency of
the newly established republic of Texas, but was defeated by Samuel
Houston, under whom he was secretary of state until his sudden death on
the 7th of December 1836.

  See _A Comprehensive History of Texas_, edited by D.G. Wooten (2
  vols., Dallas, 1898).