APOLLONIUS OF TYANA, a Greek philosopher of the Neo-Pythagorean school,
born a few years before the Christian era. He studied at Tarsus and in
the temple of Asclepius at Aegae, where he devoted himself to the
doctrines of Pythagoras and adopted the ascetic habit of life in its
fullest sense. He travelled through Asia and visited Nineveh, Babylon
and India, imbibing the oriental mysticism of magi, Brahmans and
gymnosophists. The narrative of his travels given by his disciple Damis
and reproduced by Philostratus is so full of the miraculous that many
have regarded him as an imaginary character. On his return to Europe he
was saluted as a magician, and received the greatest reverence from
priests and people generally. He himself claimed only the power of
foreseeing the future; yet in Rome it was said that he raised from death
the body of a noble lady. In the halo of his mysterious power he passed
through Greece, Italy and Spain. It was said that he was accused of
treason both by Nero and by Domitian, but escaped by miraculous means.
Finally he set up a school at Ephesus, where he died, apparently at the
age of a hundred years. Philostratus keeps up the mystery of his hero's
life by saying, "Concerning the manner of his death, _if he did die_,
the accounts are various." The work of Philostratus composed at the
instance of Julia, wife of Severus, is generally regarded as a religious
work of fiction. It contains a number of obviously fictitious stories,
through which, however, it is not impossible to discern the general
character of the man. In the 3rd century, Hierocles (q.v.) endeavoured
to prove that the doctrines and the life of Apollonius were more
valuable than those of Christ, and, in modern times, Voltaire and
Charles Blount (1654-1693), the English freethinker, have adopted a
similar standpoint. Apart from this extravagant eulogy, it is absurd to
regard Apollonius merely as a vulgar charlatan and miracle-monger. If we
cut away the mass of mere fiction which Philostratus accumulated, we
have left a highly imaginative, earnest reformer who laboured to infuse
into the flaccid dialectic of paganism a saner spirit of practical
morality.

  See L. Dyer, _Studies of the Gods in Greece_ (New York, 1891); A.
  Chassang, _Le Merveilleux dans l'antiquité_ (1882); D.M. Tredwell,
  _Sketch of the Life of Apollonius of Tyana_ (New York, 1886); F.C.
  Baur, _Apollonius von Tyana und Christus_, ed. Ed. Zeller (Leipzig,
  1876,--an attempt to show that Philostratus's story is merely a pagan
  counterblast to the New Testament history); J. Jessen, _Apollonius v.
  Tyana und sein Biograph Philostratos_ (Hamburg, 1885); J. Göttsching,
  _Apollonius von Tyana_ (Berlin, 1889); J.A. Froude, _Short Studies_,
  vol. iv.; G.R.S. Mead, _Apollonius of Tyana_ (London, 1901); B.L.
  Gildersleeve, _Essays and Studies_ (New York, 1890); Philostratus's
  _Life of Apollonius_ (Eng. trans. New York, 1905); O. de B. Priaulx,
  _The Indian Travels of Apollonius_ (1873); F.W.G. Campbell, _Apoll. of
  Tyana_ (1908); see also NEO-PYTHAGOREANISM.