APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS, the general name given to a vast system of
elevations in North America, partly in Canada, but mostly in the United
States, extending as a zone, from 100 to 300 m. wide, from Newfoundland,
Gaspé Peninsula and New Brunswick, 1500 m. south-westward to central
Alabama. The whole system may be divided into three great sections: the
_Northern_, from Newfoundland to the Hudson river; the _Central_, from
the Hudson Valley to that of New river (Great Kanawha), in Virginia and
West Virginia; and the _Southern_, from New river onwards. The northern
section includes the Shickshock Mountains and Notre Dame Range in
Quebec, scattered elevations in Maine, the White Mountains and the Green
Mountains; the central comprises, besides various minor groups, the
Valley Ridges between the Front of the Allegheny Plateau and the Great
Appalachian Valley, the New York-New Jersey Highlands and a large
portion of the Blue Ridge; and the southern consists of the prolongation
of the Blue Ridge, the Unaka Range, and the Valley Ridges adjoining the
Cumberland Plateau, with some lesser ranges.

_The Chief Summits._--The Appalachian belt includes, with the ranges
enumerated above, the plateaus sloping southward to the Atlantic Ocean
in New England, and south-eastward to the border of the coastal plain
through the central and southern Atlantic states; and on the north-west,
the Allegheny and Cumberland plateaus declining toward the Great Lakes
and the interior plains. A remarkable feature of the belt is the
longitudinal chain of broad valleys--the Great Appalachian
Valley--which, in the southerly sections divides the mountain system
into two subequal portions, but in the northernmost lies west of all the
ranges possessing typical Appalachian features, and separates them from
the Adirondack group. The mountain system has no axis of dominating
altitudes, but in every portion the summits rise to rather uniform
heights, and, especially in the central section, the various ridges and
intermontane valleys have the same trend as the system itself. None of
the summits reaches the region of perpetual snow. Mountains of the Long
Range in Newfoundland reach heights of nearly 2000 ft. In the
Shickshocks the higher summits rise to about 4000 ft. elevation. In
Maine four peaks exceed 3000 ft., including Katahdin (5200 ft.), Mount
Washington, in the White Mountains (6293 ft.), Adams (5805), Jefferson
(5725), Clay (5554), Monroe (5390), Madison (5380), Lafayette (5269);
and a number of summits rise above 4000 ft. In the Green Mountains the
highest point, Mansfield, is 4364 ft.; Lincoln (4078), Killington
(4241), Camel Hump (4088); and a number of other heights exceed 3000 ft.
The Catskills are not properly included in the system. The Blue Ridge,
rising in southern Pennsylvania and there known as South Mountain,
attains in that state elevations of about 2000 ft.; southward to the
Potomac its altitudes diminish, but 30 m. beyond again reach 2000 ft. In
the Virginia Blue Ridge the following are the highest peaks east of New
river: Mount Weather (about 1850 ft.), Mary's Rock (3523), Peaks of
Otter (4001 and 3875), Stony Man (4031), Hawks Bill (4066). In
Pennsylvania the summits of the Valley Ridges rise generally to about
2000 ft., and in Maryland Eagle Rock and Dans Rock are conspicuous
points reaching 3162 ft. and 2882 ft. above the sea. On the same side of
the Great Valley, south of the Potomac, are the Pinnacle (3007 ft.) and
Pidgeon Roost (3400 ft.). In the southern section of the Blue Ridge are
Grandfather Mountain (5964 ft.), with three other summits above 5000,
and a dozen more above 4000. The Unaka Ranges (including the Black and
Smoky Mountains) have eighteen peaks higher than 5000 ft., and eight
surpassing 6000 ft. In the Black Mountains, Mitchell (the culminating
point of the whole system) attains an altitude of 6711 ft., Balsam Cone,
6645, Black Brothers, 6690, and 6620, and Hallback, 6403. In the Smoky
Mountains we have Clingman's Peak (6611), Guyot (6636), Alexander
(6447), Leconte (6612), Curtis (6588), with several others above 6000
and many higher than 5000.

In spite of the existence of the Great Appalachian Valley, the master
streams are transverse to the axis of the system. The main watershed
follows a tortuous course which crosses the mountainous belt just north
of New river in Virginia; south of this the rivers head in the Blue
Ridge, cross the higher Unakas, receive important tributaries from the
Great Valley, and traversing the Cumberland Plateau in spreading gorges,
escape by way of the Cumberland and Tennessee rivers to the Ohio and
Mississippi, and thus to the Gulf of Mexico; in the central section the
rivers, rising in or beyond the Valley Ridges, flow through great
gorges (water gaps) to the Great Valley, and by south-easterly courses
across the Blue Ridge to tidal estuaries penetrating the coastal plain;
in the northern section the water-parting lies on the inland side of the
mountainous belt, the main lines of drainage running from north to
south.

_Geology._--The rocks of the Appalachian belt fall naturally into two
divisions; ancient (pre-Cambrian) crystallines, including marbles,
schists, gneisses, granites and other massive igneous rocks, and a great
succession of Paleozoic sediments. The crystallines are confined to the
portion of the belt east of the Great Valley where Paleozoic rocks are
always highly metamorphosed and occur for the most part in limited
patches, excepting in New England and Canada, where they assume greater
areal importance, and are besides very generally intruded by granites.
The Paleozoic sediments, ranging in age from Cambrian to Permian, occupy
the Great Valley, the Valley Ridges and the plateaus still farther west.
They are rarely metamorphosed to the point of recrystallization, though
locally shales are altered to roofing slates, sandstones are indurated,
limestones slightly marblized, and coals, originally bituminous, are
changed to anthracite in northern Pennsylvania, and to graphite in Rhode
Island. Igneous intrusions consist only of unimportant dikes of trap.
The most striking and uniformly characteristic geologic feature of the
mountains is their internal structure, consisting of innumerable
parallel, long and narrow folds, always closely appressed in the eastern
part of any cross-section (Piedmont Plateau to Great Valley), less so
along a central zone (Great Valley and Valley Ridges), and increasingly
open on the west (Allegheny and Cumberland Plateaus). Asymmetry of the
folds is a marked characteristic in the zones of closer folding, the
anticlines having long gently inclined easterly limbs, and short, steep
and even overturned limbs upon the west. The effect of such folds is
often exaggerated by thrusts, and faulting of this sort is prominent in
the southern section, where the existence of over-thrusts measured by
several miles has been established.

What may be termed the ancestral Appalachian system was formed during
the post-carboniferous revolution, though certain of its elements had
been previously outlined, and perhaps at different dates. Folding of the
rocks resulted from the operation of great compressive forces acting
tangentially to the figure of the earth. Extensive and deep-seated
crumpling was necessarily accompanied by vertical uplift throughout the
zone affected, but once at least since their birth the mountains have
been worn down to a lowland, and the mountains of to-day are the
combined product of subsequent uplift of a different sort, and
dissection by erosion. Produced by long-continued subaerial decay and
erosion, in later Cretaceous times this lowland extended from the
Atlantic Ocean well toward the interior of North America; since then the
whole continent has been generally elevated, and by successive steps the
Appalachian belt has been raised to form a wide but relatively low arch.
The crosswise courses of the greater rivers result from the rivers being
older than the mountains, which indeed have been produced by
circumdenudation. The master streams of the present have inherited their
channels from the drainage systems of the Cretaceous lowland, and though
raised athwart the courses of the lowland trunk streams the great arch
was developed so slowly that these channels could be maintained through
_pari passu_ deepening. Former tributaries have given place to others
developed with reference to the distribution of more or less easily
eroded strata, the present longitudinal valleys being determined by the
out-crop of soft shales or soluble limestones, and the parallel ridges
upheld by hard sandstones or schists. Parallelism of mountain ridges and
intervening valleys is thus attributable to the folding of the rocks,
but the origin of the interior structure of the mountains is to be kept
distinct from the origin of the mountains as features of topography.

_Flora and Fauna._--Much of the region is covered with forest yielding
quantities of valuable timber, especially in Canada and northern New
England. The most valuable trees for lumber are spruce, white pine,
hemlock, cedar, white birch, ash, maple and basswood; all excepting pine
and hemlock and poplar in addition are ground into wood pulp for the
manufacture of paper. In the central and southern parts of the belt oak
and hickory constitute valuable hard woods, and certain varieties of the
former furnish quantities of tan bark. The tulip tree produces a good
clear lumber known as white wood or poplar, and is also a source of
pulp. In the south both white and yellow pine abounds. Many flowering
and fruit-bearing shrubs of the heath family add to the beauty of the
mountainous districts, rhododendron and kalmia often forming
impenetrable thickets. Bears, mountain lions (pumas), wild cats (lynx)
and wolves haunt the more remote fastnesses of the mountains; foxes
abound; deer are found in many districts and moose in the north.

_Influence on History._--For a century the Appalachians were a barrier
to the westward expansion of the English colonies; the continuity of the
system, the bewildering multiplicity of its succeeding ridges, the
tortuous courses and roughness of its transverse passes, a heavy forest
and dense undergrowth all conspired to hold the settlers on the
seaward-sloping plateaus and coastal plains. Only by way of the Hudson
and Mohawk valleys, and round about the southern termination of the
system were there easy routes to the interior of the country, and these
were long closed by hostile aborigines and jealous French or Spanish
colonists. In eastern Pennsylvania the Great Valley was accessible by
reason of a broad gateway between the end of South Mountain and the
Highlands, and here in the Lebanon Valley settled German Moravians,
whose descendants even now retain the peculiar patois known as
"Pennsylvania Dutch." These were late comers to the New World forced to
the frontier to find unclaimed lands. With their followers of both
German and Scotch-Irish origin, they worked their way southward and soon
occupied all of the Virginia Valley and the upper reaches of the Great
Valley tributaries of the Tennessee. By 1755 the obstacle to westward
expansion had been thus reduced by half; outposts of the English
colonists had penetrated the Allegheny and Cumberland plateaus,
threatening French monopoly in the transmontane region, and a conflict
became inevitable. Making common cause against the French to determine
the control of the Ohio valley, the unsuspected strength of the
colonists was revealed, and the successful ending of the French and
Indian War extended England's territory to the Mississippi. To this
strength the geographic isolation enforced by the Appalachian mountains
had been a prime contributor. The confinement of the colonies between an
ocean and a mountain wall led to the fullest occupation of the coastal
border of the continent, which was possible under existing conditions of
agriculture, conducing to a community of purpose, a political and
commercial solidarity, which would not otherwise have been developed. As
early as 1700 it was possible to ride from Portland, Maine, to southern
Virginia, sleeping each night at some considerable village. In contrast
to this complete industrial occupation, the French territory was held by
a small and very scattered population, its extent and openness adding
materially to the difficulties of a disputed tenure. Bearing the brunt
of this contest as they did, the colonies were undergoing preparation
for the subsequent struggle with the home government. Unsupported by
shipping, the American armies fought toward the sea with the mountains
at their back protecting them against Indians leagued with the British.
The few settlements beyond the Great Valley were free for self-defence
because debarred from general participation in the conflict by reason of
their position.

  See the separate articles on the states, and also the following
  references:--Topographic maps and Geologic Folios of the United States
  Geological Survey; Bailey Willis, "The Northern Appalachians," and
  C.W. Hayes, "The Southern Appalachians," both in _National Geographic
  Monographs_, vol. i.; and chaps, iii., iv. and v. of Miss E.C.
  Semple's _American History and its Geographic Conditions_ (Boston,
  1903).     (A. C. Sp.)