APPARITIONS. An apparition, strictly speaking, is merely an appearance
(Lat. _apparere_, to appear), the result of perception exercised on any
stimulus of any of the senses. But in ordinary usage the word apparition
denotes a perception (generally through the sense of sight) which
cannot, as a rule, be shown to be occasioned by an object in external
nature. We say "as a rule" because many so-called apparitions are merely
illusions, i.e. misconstructions of the perceptive processes, as when a
person in a bad light sees a number of small children leading a horse,
and finds, on nearer approach, that he sees two men carrying bee-hives
suspended from a pole. Again, Sir Walter Scott's vision of Byron, then
lately dead, proved to be a misconstruction of certain plaids and cloaks
hanging in the hall at Abbotsford, or so Sir Walter declared. Had he not
discovered the physical basis of this illusion (which, while it lasted,
was an apparition, technically speaking), he and others might have
thought that it was an apparition in the popular sense of the word, a
ghost. In popular phraseology a ghost is understood to be a phantasm
produced in some way by the spirit of a dead person, the impression
being usually visual, though the ghost, or apparition, may also affect
the sense of hearing (by words, knocks, whistles, groans and so forth),
or the sense of touch, or of weight, as in the case of the "incubus." In
ordinary speech an apparition of a person not known to the percipient to
be dead is called a wraith, in the Highland phrase, a spirit of the
living. The terms _ghost_ and _wraith_ involve the hypothesis that the
false perceptions are caused by spirits, a survival of the archaic
animistic hypothesis (see ANIMISM), an hypothesis as difficult to prove
as to disprove. Apparitions, of course, are not confined to
anthropomorphic phantasms; we hear of phantom coaches (sometimes seen,
but more frequently heard), of phantom dogs, cats, horses, cattle, deer,
and even of phantom houses.

Whatever may be the causes of these and other false perceptions,--most
curious when the impression is shared by several witnesses,--they may
best be considered under the head of hallucination (q.v.).
Hallucinations may be pathological, i.e. the result of morbid conditions
of brain or nerve, of disease, of fever, of insanity, of alcoholism, of
the abuse of drugs. Again, they may be the result of dissociation, or
may occur in the borderland of sleep or waking, and in this case they
partake of the hallucinatory nature of dreams (q.v.). Again,
hallucinations may, once or twice in a lifetime, come into the
experience of the sane, the healthy, and, as far as any tests can be
applied, of the wide-awake. In such instances the apparition (whether it
take the form of a visual phantasm, of a recognized voice, of a touch,
or what not) may be coincidental or non-coincidental. The phantasm is
called coincidental if it represents a known and distant person who is
later found to have been dying or in some other crisis at the moment of
the percipient's experience. When the false perception coincides with
nothing of the sort, it is styled non-coincidental. Coincidental
apparitions have been explained by the theory of telepathy (q.v.), one
mind or brain impressing another in some unknown way so as to beget an
hallucinatory apparition or phantasm. On the evidence, so far as it has
been collected and analysed, it seems that the mind which, on the
hypothesis, begets the hallucinations, usually does so without
_conscious_ effort (see SUBLIMINAL SELF). There are, however, a few
cases in which the experiment of begetting, in another, an hallucination
from a distance, is said to have been experimentally and consciously
made, with success.

If the telepathic theory of coincidental hallucinations be accepted, we
have still to account for the much more common non-coincidental
apparitions of the living who do not happen to be in any particular
crisis. In these instances it cannot be demonstrated that telepathy has
_not_ been at work, as when a person is seen at a place which he thought
of visiting, but did not visit. F.W. Myers even upheld a theory of
psychorhagy, holding that the spirits of some persons have a way of
manifesting themselves at a distance by a psychic invasion. This
involves, as he remarked, paleolithic psychology, and the old savage
doctrine of animism, rather than telepathy (see Myers, _Human
Personality_). Of belief in coincidental hallucinations or wraiths among
savages, records are scanty; the belief, however, is found among Maoris
and Fuegians (see Lang, _Making of Religions_). The perception of
apparitions of distant but actual scenes and occurrences is usually
called clairvoyance (q.v.). The belief is also familiar under the name
of second sight (see SECOND SIGHT), a term of Scots usage, though the
belief in it, and the facts if accepted, are of world-wide diffusion.
The apparitions may either represent actual persons and places, or may
be symbolical, taking the form of phantasmic lights, coffins, skeletons,
shrouds and so forth. Again, the appearances may either represent
things, persons and occurrences of the past (see RETROCOGNITION), or of
the present (clairvoyance), or of the future (see PREMONITION). When the
apparitions produce themselves in given rooms, houses or localities, and
are exhibited to various persons at various times, the locality is
popularly said to be haunted by spirits, that is, of the dead, on the
animistic hypothesis (see HAUNTINGS). Like the other alleged facts,
these are of world-wide diffusion, or the belief in them is world-wide,
and peculiar to no race, age, or period of culture. A haunted place is a
centre of permanent possibilities of hallucinations, or is believed to
be so. A distinct species of hauntings are those in which unexplained
sounds and movements of objects, apparently untouched, occur. The German
term _Poltergeist_ (q.v.) has been given to the supposed cause of these
occurrences where the cause is not ascertained to be sportive imposture.
In the performances of modern spiritualists the Poltergeist appears, as
it were, to be domesticated, and to come at the call of the medium.

An intermittent kind of ominous haunting attached, not to places, but to
families, is that of the banshee (Celtic) or family death omen, such as
the white bird of the Oxenhams, the Airlie drummer, the spectral rider
of Clan Gilzean, the rappings of the Woodde family. These apparitions,
with fairies and _djinns_ (the Arab form of fairy), haunt the borderland
between folk-lore and psychical research.

So far we have been concerned with spontaneous apparitions, or with the
belief in them. Among induced apparitions may be reckoned the
materialized forms of spiritual _séances_, which have a material basis
of veils, false moustaches, wigs and the _corpus vile_ of the medium. It
is also possible that mere expectancy and suggestion induce
hallucinatory perceptions among the members of the circle. That
apparitions of a sort can be induced by hypnotic and posthypnotic
suggestion is certain enough (see HYPNOTISM). Savages produce
apparitions in similar ways by suggestion, accompanied by dances,
fumigations, darkness, fasting, drugs, and whatever can affect the
imaginations of the onlookers (see MAGIC). Both in savage and civilized
life, some persons can provoke themselves into beholding apparitions
usually fantastic, but occasionally coincidental, by sedulously staring
into any clear deep water, a fragment of rock crystal, a piece of
polished basalt or obsidian, a mirror, a ring, a sword blade, or a glass
of sherry (see CRYSTAL GAZING). Indeed any object, a wall, the palm of
the hand, the shoulder-blade-bone of a sheep, may be, and has been used
to this end (see DIVINATION).

Almost all known apparitions may accommodate themselves to one or other
of the categories given, whether they be pathological, coincidental or
spontaneous, induced, permanently localized, or sporadic.

  See generally, SPIRITUALISM and PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.     (A. L.)