APPANAGE, or APANAGE (a French word from the late Lat. _apanagium_,
formed from _apanare, i.e. panem porrigere_, to give bread, i.e.
sustenance), in its original sense, the means of subsistence given by
parents to their younger children as distinct from the rights secured
to the eldest born by the custom of primogeniture. In its modern usage
it is practically confined to the money endowment given to the younger
children of reigning or mediatized houses in Germany and Austria, which
reverts to the state or to the head of the family on the extinction of
the line of the original grantee. In English history the system of
appanages never played any great part, and the term is now properly
applied only to the appanages of the crown: the duchy of Cornwall,
assigned to the king's eldest son at birth, or on his father's accession
to the crown, and the duchy of Lancaster. In the history of France,
however, the appanage was a very important factor. The word denotes in
very early French law the portion of lands or money given by fathers and
mothers to their sons or daughters on marriage, and usually connotes a
renunciation by the latter of any future inheritance; or it may denote
the portion given by the eldest son to his brothers and sisters when he
was sole inheritor. The word _apanage_ is still employed in this sense
in French official texts of some _Customs_; but it was in old public law
that it received its definite meaning and importance. Under the kings of
the third dynasty, the division of the kingdom among the sons of the
dead monarch which had characterized the Merovingian and Carolingian
dynasties, ceased. The eldest son alone succeeded to the crown; but at
the same time a custom was established by which the king made
territorial provision suitable to their rank for his other children or
for his brothers and sisters; custom forbade their being left landless.
Lands and lordships thus bestowed constituted the appanages, which
interfered so greatly with the formation of ancient France. While the
persevering policy of the Capets, which aimed at reuniting the great
fiefs, duchies, countships, baronies, &c., to the domain of the crown,
gradually reconstructed for their benefit a territorial sovereignty over
France, the institution of the appanage periodically subtracted large
portions from it. Louis XI., in particular, had to struggle against the
appanaged nobles. The old law, however, never abolished this
institution. The edict of Moulins (1566) maintained it, as one of the
exceptions to the inalienability of the crown-lands; only it was then
decided that daughters of France should be appanaged in money, or that
if, in default of coin, lands were assigned to them, these lands should
be redeemable by the crown in perpetuity. The efforts of the kings to
minimize this evil, and of the old jurisprudence to deal with the
matter, resulted in two expedients: (1) the reversion of the appanage to
the crown was secured as far as possible, being declared inalienable and
transmissible only to male descendants in the male line of the person
appanaged; (2) originally the person appanaged had possessed all the
rights of a duke or count--that is to say, in the middle ages nearly all
the attributes of sovereignty; the more important of these attributes
were now gradually reserved to the monarch, including public authority
over the inhabitants of the appanage in all essential matters. However,
it is evident from the letters of appanage, dated April 1771, in favour
of the count of Provence, how many functions of public authority an
appanaged person still held. The Constituent Assembly, by the law dated
the 22nd of November 1790, decided that in future there should be no
appanages in real estate, and that younger sons of monarchs, married and
over twenty-five years of age, should be provided for by yearly grants
(_rentes apanagères_) from the public funds. The laws of the 13th of
August and the 21st of December 1790 revoked all the existing appanages,
except those of the Luxembourg Palace and the Palais Royal. To each
person hitherto appanaged an annual income of one million _livres_ was
assigned, and two millions for the brothers of the king. All this came
to an end with the monarchy. Napoleon, by the _sénatus-consulte_ of the
30th of January 1810, resolved to create appanages for the emperor's
princely descendants, such appanages to consist for the most part of
lands on French soil. The fall of the empire again annulled this
enactment. The last appanage known in France was that enjoyed by the
house of Orleans. Having been re-established, or recognized as still
existing, by the Restoration, it was formally confirmed by the law of
the 15th of January 1825. On the accession of Louis Philippe it was
united to the national property by the law of the 2nd of March 1832.

  For appanages in ancient law see the _Essai sur les apanages ou
  mémoires historiques de leur établissement_, attributed to Du Vaucel,
  about 1780.     (J. P. E.)