APPEAL, in law. In the old English common law the term "appeal" was used
to describe a process peculiar to English criminal procedure. It was a
right of prosecution possessed as a personal privilege by a party
individually aggrieved by a felony, a privilege of which the crown could
not directly or indirectly deprive him, since he could use it alike when
the prisoner was tried and acquitted, and when he was convicted and
pardoned. It was chiefly known in practice as the privilege of the
nearest relation of a murdered person. When in 1729 (after Colonel
Oglethorpe's inquiry and report on the London prisons) Banbridge and
other gaolers were indicted for their treatment of prisoners, but were
acquitted for deficiency of evidence, appeals for murder were freely
brought by relatives of deceased prisoners. In the case of Slaughterford
(1708) the accused was charged with murdering a woman whom he had
seduced; the evidence was very imperfect, and he was acquitted on
indictment. But public indignation being aroused by the atrocities
alleged to have been perpetrated, an appeal was brought, and on
conviction he was hanged, as his execution was a privilege belonging to
the prosecutor, of which the crown could not deprive him by a pardon. In
1818 an appeal was ingeniously met by an offer of battle, since if the
appellee were an able-bodied man he had the choice between combat or a
jury (see WAGER). This neutralizing of one obsolete and barbarous
process by another called the attention of the legislature to the
subject, and appeal in criminal cases, along with trial by battle, was
abolished in 1819. The history of this appeal is fully dealt with in
Pollock and Maitland, _History of English Law_, 1898.

In its usual modern sense the term appeal is applied to the proceeding
by which the decision of a court of justice is brought for review before
another tribunal of higher authority. In Roman jurisprudence it was used
in this and in other significations; it was sometimes equivalent to
prosecution, or the calling up of an accused person before a tribunal
where the accuser appealed to the protection of the magistrate against
injustice or oppression. The derivation from _appellare_ ("call")
suggests that its earliest meaning was an urgent outcry or prayer
against injustice. During the republic the magistrate was generally
supreme within his sphere, and those who felt themselves outraged by
injustice threw themselves on popular protection by _provocatio_,
instead of looking to redress from a higher official authority. Under
the empire different grades of jurisdiction were established, and the
ultimate remedy was an appeal to the emperor; thus Paul, when brought
before Festus, appealed unto Caesar. Such appeals were, however, not
heard by the emperor in person but by a supreme judge representing him.
In the _Corpus Juris_ the appeal to the emperor is called
indiscriminately _appellatio_ and _provocatio_. A considerable portion
of the 49th book of the _Pandects_ is devoted to appeals; but little of
the practical operation of the system is to be deduced from the
propositions there brought together.

During the middle ages full scope was afforded for appeals from the
lower to the higher authorities in the church. In matters
ecclesiastical, including those matrimonial, testamentary and other
departments, which the church ever tried to bring within the operation
of the canon law, there were various grades of appeal, ending with the
pope. The claims of the church to engross appeals in matters trenching
on the temporal rights of princes led to continual conflicts between
church and state, terminated in England at the reformation by the
suppression in 1534 of appeals to Rome, which had previously been
discouraged by legislation of Edward III. and Richard II.

In temporal, as distinct from spiritual matters, it became customary for
ambitious sovereigns to encourage appeals from the courts of the crown
vassals to themselves as represented by the supreme judges, and
Charlemagne usually enjoys the credit of having set the example of this
system of centralization by establishing _missi dominici_. It is not
improbable that his claim was suggested or justified by the practice of
the Roman empire, to the sovereignty whereof he claimed to be
successor.

_England._--When the royal authority in England grew strong as against
that of the tenants _in capite_, the king's courts in England were more
effectively organized, and their net swept wider so as to draw within
their cognizance matters previously adjudged in courts baron or courts
leet or in the county court, and they acquired authority to supervise
and review the decisions of the inferior and local courts, to control
and limit their claims to exercise jurisdiction, and to transfer causes
from the local to the royal courts. The machinery by which this process
was usually effected, under the common law, was not by what is now known
as appeal, but by the process of _certiorari_ or writs of error or
prohibition. Recourse was also had against the decisions of the royal
courts by appeal to the great council of the king, or to parliament as a
whole. The supremacy of the king's courts over all causes, as well
ecclesiastical as civil, has been completely established since the reign
of Henry VIII., and they have effectually asserted the power to regulate
and keep within their proper jurisdiction all other tribunals within the
realm. Since that date the organization of judicial tribunals has
gradually been changed and improved with the object (1) of creating a
judicial hierarchy independent of executive control; (2) of ensuring
that all decisions on questions of law shall be co-ordinated and
rendered systematic by correction of the errors and vagaries of
subordinate tribunals; and (3) of securing so far as possible uniformity
in the judicial interpretation and administration of the law, by
creating a supreme appellate tribunal to whose decisions all other
tribunals are bound to conform. It would be undesirable to detail at
length the history of appellate jurisdiction in England, involving as it
would the discussion in great detail of the history and procedure of
English law, and it may suffice to indicate the system of appeals as at
present organized, beginning with the lowest courts.

_Justices of the Peace._--The decisions of justices of the peace sitting
as courts of summary jurisdiction are subject to review on questions of
law only by the High Court of Justice. This review is in a sense
consultative, because it is usually effected by means of a case
voluntarily stated by the justices at the request of the aggrieved
party, in which are set forth the facts as determined by the justices,
the questions of law raised and their decision thereon, as to the
correctness whereof the opinion of the High Court is invited. The
procedure is equally open in criminal and civil matters brought before
the justices. But when the justices decline to state a case for the
opinion of the High Court, the latter, if review seems desirable, may
order the justices to state a case. And the High Court has also power to
control the action of justices by prohibiting them from acting in a case
beyond their jurisdiction, ordering them to exercise jurisdiction where
they have improperly declined (_mandamus_), or bringing up for review
and quashing orders or convictions which they have made in excess of
jurisdiction, or in cases in which interested or biassed justices have
adjudicated (_certiorari_). None of these regulative processes exactly
corresponds to what is popularly known as an appeal, but in effect if
not in form an appeal is thus given.

There is also another form of appeal, in the fullest sense of the term,
from the decision of justices sitting as a court of summary jurisdiction
to the justices of the same county sitting in general or quarter
sessions, or in the case of a borough to the recorder as judge of the
borough court of quarter sessions. This form of appeal is in every case
the creation of statute: and even in text-books it is hardly possible to
find a really complete list of the matters in respect of which such
appeal lies. But as regards criminal cases there is an approximately
general rule, given by § 19 of the Summary Jurisdiction Act 1879, viz.
that an appeal to quarter sessions lies from the conviction or order of
a court of summary jurisdiction directing imprisonment without the
option of a fine as a punishment for an offence, or for failing to do or
to abstain from doing any act required to be done or left undone other
than an order for the payment of money, or to find sureties or give
security or to enter into a recognizance, or a conviction made on a plea
of guilty or admission of the truth of the matter of complaint.

As a general rule, subject to particular statutory exceptions, appeals
of this kind are by way of rehearing, i.e. the actor or prosecutor must
before the appellate tribunal call his witnesses and prove his case just
as if no previous hearing had taken place before the court appealed from
(Pritchard, _Quarter Sessions Practice_, 2nd ed., 461). The only limit
is that the appellant must confine himself to the grounds of appeal
stated in the notice of appeal given by him.

_Justices in Quarter Sessions._--This tribunal has under the commission
of the peace and under statute power to refer questions of difficulty
arising before it for decision to the High Court. The old mode of
exercising this power was by sending on to assizes indictments raising
difficult questions which had been presented at quarter sessions. The
High Court has _ex officio_ power to transfer such indictments where the
nature of the case and the demands of justice call for such transfer.
The quarter sessions had also power under statute on trying an
indictment to refer to the court for crown cases reserved (Crown Cases
Act 1848), abolished by the Criminal Appeal Act 1907, questions of law
which had arisen at the trial, and in all civil cases the quarter
sessions has power of its own volition and subject to no direct
compulsion to consult the High Court on legal questions of difficulty
which have arisen. Until 1894 this jurisdiction was regarded as
consultative only. It was and is exercised by stating the facts, of
which the court of quarter sessions is the sole judge, and indicating
the questions of law arising on the facts, and the view of quarter
sessions thereon, and inviting the opinion of the High Court. Under the
Judicature Act 1894 cases stated in this way are now treated as
"appeals" in the popular sense.

_Inferior Courts of purely Civil Jurisdiction._--An appeal also lies as
a general rule to the High Court from the judgment of a county court or
of any inferior tribunal having civil jurisdiction.

(a) County Courts. Any party to an action or matter in a county court
who is dissatisfied with the determination or direction of the judge in
law or equity, or upon the admission or rejection of any evidence, may
appeal against the decision in the following cases: (1) if the amount of
claim or counter-claim in the proceeding exceeds £20; or (2) in all
equity matters or cases in which an injunction has been given; or (3) in
actions to recover possession of land where questions of title are
involved (County Courts Act 1888, § 120). In the case of a claim below
£20 no appeal lies except by the leave of the county court. The old
practice of appeal by way of special case as in appeals from justices
has been abolished, and the present procedure is by notice of motion
(R.S.C. O. LIX. rr. 10-18).

These appeals are heard in the king's bench division, except in the case
of appeals from judgments of a county court sitting in the exercise of
admiralty jurisdiction, which are heard by two or more judges sitting in
the probate, divorce and admiralty division. The chancery division has
never sat to hear "appeals" from a county court exercising equity
jurisdiction; but at times, by _prohibition_ or _certiorari_, has, in
effect, reviewed or restrained excess of jurisdiction by county courts
in equity matters.

The decision of the High Court on county court appeals is final unless
an appeal to the court of appeal is brought by leave of that court or of
the High Court (Judicature Act 1894, § 1, sub. sect. 5; Judicature Act
1873, § 45).

(b) Other inferior courts of civil jurisdiction. Appeals from the local
courts of record which still survive in certain cities, towns and
districts are in a somewhat anomalous position. The general rule is
that, unless a statute regulates such appeal, it may be brought in the
king's bench division of the High Court on notice of motion in any case
in which, before the Judicature Acts, the court of king's bench could
have reviewed the decision of the inferior court by writ of error. The
history of this question is dealt with in _Darlow v. Shuttleworth_,
1902, 1 K.B. 721.

In the case of the mayor's court of London, under the local and general
statutes regulating that court, the appeal is usually to the king's
bench division, but where there is what is termed "error" on the face of
the proceedings of the mayor's court, the appeal lies direct to the
court of appeal as successor of the court of exchequer chamber. Appeals
from the Liverpool court of passage and from the chancery courts of the
duchies of Lancaster and Durham lie by statute direct to the court of
appeal.

_High Court of Justice._--Until the Supreme Court of Judicature Acts of
1873 and 1875 came into operation, the superior courts in England were
imperfectly co-ordinated both as to jurisdiction and appeals. The effect
of these acts was to create a Supreme Court of Judicature divided into
two main branches, the High Court of Justice, which is an appellate
court with respect to the inferior courts already mentioned, and to
certain other special courts and persons; and the court of appeal, which
is mainly concerned with appeals from the High Court of Justice.

The High Court of Justice acts as an appellate court or court of
consultation with reference to courts of summary jurisdiction or quarter
sessions and to county courts and other inferior courts of civil
jurisdiction in the cases already indicated. The three divisions of the
court are somewhat differently placed with reference to appeals.

In the chancery division (made up, in 1908, of six single judge courts)
no appeals are heard except from subordinate officials (masters) of the
court, or an occasional interference by _certiorari_ or _prohibition_
with a county court.

In the probate, divorce and admiralty division, besides the supervision
which may be exercised by a single judge over the subordinate officers
of the court (registrars), divisional courts (of two judges) hear
appeals from decisions of the county court in admiralty causes, and
appeals from justices in cases between husband and wife under the
Summary Jurisdiction (Married Women) Act 1895, as amended by the
Licensing Act 1902. In the first of these cases the appeal is on law
only as in the case of other county court appeals; in the second, the
procedure is by rehearing, or reconsideration of the facts as minuted in
the court appealed from, and of the law there applied to these facts.

The bulk of the appellate work of the High Court is conducted in the
king's bench division--which, as successor of the old court of king's
bench in the duties of _custos morum_ of the realm, still retains
supervisory power over all inferior courts in all cases in which that
supervision has not been transferred to the other divisions of the High
Court or to the court of appeal, or to the court of criminal appeal.

The king's bench division exercises appellate jurisdiction in the
following cases.

With respect to decisions of justices of the peace sitting at quarter
sessions, or as a court of summary jurisdiction, except in the case
above stated, the subject matter of appeal is for the most part of a
criminal or quasi-criminal character, the civil jurisdiction of justices
being comparatively limited. The appeal in such cases is as to matters
of law only, the justices' decision on facts not being subject to
review.

In the case of the courts above named, the appeal is brought by writ of
_certiorari_, where the jurisdiction of quarter sessions to give the
judgment challenged is denied _in toto_, or in some cases by writ of
_habeas corpus_, where the appellant is in custody under an order of the
court appealed from (Judicature Act 1894, § 2). The best example of this
is the right of a fugitive criminal committed for extradition to
challenge the legality of the decision of the committing magistrate by
writ of _habeas corpus_. Save in cases of want of jurisdiction or
refusal to exercise it, no appeal lies from quarter sessions except by
consent of the court appealed from, which states the facts as
ascertained by the inferior court, and invites the review of the
superior court upon the questions of law raised by the facts as found.

Decisions of justices sitting in the exercise of summary jurisdiction
are subject to review by a special case in which the justices state the
facts found by them and their decision on the points of law, and invite
the review of the appellate court on these grounds. Such cases for
appeal are usually stated by consent of the justices, but in the event
of their refusal the appellate court may order that a case shall be
stated.

Decisions of justices in the exercise of summary jurisdiction may also
be challenged by writ of _certiorari_ as having been wholly outside
their jurisdiction; and in such proceeding the appellate tribunal may
review the evidence taken below so far as to ascertain whether the
justices have by an erroneous finding of fact enabled themselves to
assume a jurisdiction which upon the true facts they did not possess.

Where the decision appealed from is in a criminal cause or matter the
decision of the High Court is final. Where it is in a civil matter a
further appeal also lies to the court of appeal by leave of the High
Court or of the court of appeal (Judicature Act 1873, § 45).

Appeals in criminal cases tried on indictment, criminal information or
coroner's inquisition, stand on a different footing from other appeals.

For many years the question of criminal appeal in general had been a
matter of great controversy. As early as 1844 a bill had been
unsuccessfully introduced for the purpose of establishing appeal in
criminal cases, and from that time up to 1906 nearly thirty bills were
brought forward with the same object, but none succeeded in passing. In
1892 the question was referred to the council of judges and favourably
reported upon by them. It may be remarked that England was practically
the only civilized country in which there was no appeal in criminal
cases. It is true there was an appeal on questions of law arising at the
trial. But the procedure was intricate and technical, being either (1)
by writ of error, issued by the consent of the attorney-general
(expressed by his _fiat_), to review errors of law appearing in the
record of the trial, or (2) by special case, stated by the judge
presiding at the trial, with respect to a question of law raised at the
trial. These appeals were heard by the king's bench division. Meanwhile
there had been a considerable development of public opinion in favour of
the establishment of criminal appeal, a development undoubtedly hastened
by the report of a committee of inquiry in the case of Adolf Beck
(1904), showing clearly that the home office was not a satisfactory
tribunal of final appeal. In 1906 the lord chancellor (Lord Loreburn)
introduced another criminal appeal bill, which passed the House of
Lords, but was dropped in the House of Commons after a first reading.
The next year the act (Criminal Appeal Act 1907), which was ultimately
carried, was introduced into the House of Commons. By this act a court
is established consisting of the lord chief justice and eight judges of
the king's bench division, the jurisdiction of the court for crown cases
reserved being transferred to the new court. The court to be duly
constituted must consist of not less than three judges and of an uneven
number of judges. The court may sit in two or more divisions if the lord
chief justice so directs. Its sittings are held in London unless special
directions are given by the lord chief justice that it shall sit at some
other place. The opinion of the majority of those hearing the case
determines any question before the court, and judgment is pronounced by
the president (who is the lord chief justice or senior member present),
unless in questions of law, when, if it is convenient that separate
judgments should be pronounced by the members of the court, they may be
so pronounced. The judgment of the court of criminal appeal is final,
except where the decision involves a point of law of exceptional public
importance, and a certificate must be obtained from the attorney-general
to that effect. The court of criminal appeal is a superior court of
record. An appeal may be made either against conviction or against
sentence. A person convicted on indictment may appeal either on a
question of law alone or of fact alone, or on a question of mixed law
and fact. On a point of law a prisoner has an unqualified right of
appeal, on a question of fact or of mixed law and fact there is a right
of appeal only if leave be obtained from the court of criminal appeal or
a certificate be granted by the judge who tried the prisoner that it is
a fit case for appeal. The court is given a wide discretion as to
whether a conviction may be sustained or set aside. The court may allow
the appeal if they think that the verdict of the jury should be set
aside because it is unreasonable, or because it cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence, or that the judgment should be set aside
on the ground of a wrong decision on any point of law, or that on any
ground there was a miscarriage of justice. Power is given to the court
to dismiss the appeal if they consider that no substantial miscarriage
of justice has occurred, even though they are of opinion that the point
raised in the appeal might be decided in favour of the appellant. The
sentence passed at the trial may be quashed by the appeal court and such
other sentence (whether more or less severe) warranted in law by the
verdict substituted. Notice of appeal or notice of application for leave
to appeal must be given within ten days of the date of conviction; where
a conviction involves sentence of death or corporal punishment the
sentence must not be executed until after the expiration of ten days,
and, if notice of appeal is given, not until after the determination of
the appeal or the final dismissal of the application for leave to
appeal. The act gives the court power to order any witnesses who would
have been compellable witnesses at the trial to attend and be examined
before the court, and to receive the evidence, if tendered, of any
witness who is a competent but not compellable witness. If any question
arises on the appeal involving prolonged examination of documents or
accounts or any scientific or local investigation, which the court
thinks cannot be conveniently conducted before it, the matter may be
referred to a special commissioner appointed by the court, and the court
may act on the report of that commissioner if it thinks fit. An
appellant is given the right to be present on the hearing of his appeal,
if he desires it, except where the appeal is on some ground involving a
question of law alone, but rules of court may provide for his presence
in such a case, or the court may give him leave. The act requires
shorthand notes to be taken of the proceedings at the trial of any
person, who, if convicted, would have a right to appeal under the act.
Nothing in the act affects the prerogative of mercy, and the home
secretary may, if he thinks fit, at any time refer a case to the court
of criminal appeal.

_The Court of Appeal._--The court of appeal, constituted under the
Judicature Acts, is one of the two permanent divisions of the Supreme
Court of Judicature. As now constituted the court consists of _ex
officio_ members and five ordinary members, styled lords justices of
appeal. The _ex officio_ members are the lord chancellor, every person
who has held that office, the lord chief justice, the master of the
rolls, and the president of the probate, &c., division.

The ordinary business of the court is carried on by the lords justices
under the presidency of the master of the rolls, who in 1881 ceased to
be a judge of the High Court (Judicature Act 1881, § 2). The court
usually sits in two divisions of three judges, but on occasion a third
court can be formed, with the assistance of the other _ex officio_
judges, in the absence of the ordinary judges from illness or public
engagements, or to deal with arrears of business. The quorum for final
appeals is three, for interlocutory appeals two judges.

The court of appeal has succeeded to the appellate authority exercised
(1) in the case of equity and bankruptcy matters by the lord chancellor
and the lords justices of appeal in chancery (Judicature Act 1873, §
18); (2) in the case of common law matters, by the court of exchequer
chamber, as a court of error, and the superior courts of common law
sitting to review the decisions of single judges of these courts sitting
with or without a jury at first instance in civil actions; (3) in the
case of divorce or probate causes by the full court of divorce
(Judicature Act 1881, § 9); (4) in the case of admiralty causes by the
king in council or the judicial committee of the privy council; (5) in
the case of applications for new trials in jury actions by the king's
bench division (Judicature Act 1890, § 1).

The court never had jurisdiction to hear an appeal in any criminal cause
or matter, but was able to review by writ of error decisions of the
king's bench division in such cases, unless the court for crown cases
reserved had dealt with the question under the Crown Cases Act 1848.
This procedure has been abolished by the Criminal Appeal Act 1907.
Instances of procedure by writ of error were rare. Those best worth
notice are the cases of the Tichborne claimant on his conviction of
perjury, and the case of C. Bradlaugh on the sufficiency of the
indictment against him for publishing the _Fruits of Philosophy_.

The appellate jurisdiction of the court as now exercised entitles the
court to hear and determine (1) appeals from every judgment or decree of
every division of the High Court in all civil cases in which such
judgment is not declared final by statute; (2) applications for a new
trial in civil cases tried in the king's bench division by judge and
jury which, until 1890, were dealt with by two or more judges in that
division; (3) appeals in matters of civil practice and procedure from
decisions of a single judge in chambers, which, until 1894, were dealt
with in a divisional court or by a judge in open court; (4) appeals from
the chancery courts of Durham (Palatine Court of Durham Act 1889) and
Lancaster (act of 1890, c. 23) and the Liverpool court of passage
(_Anderson v. Dean_, 1894, 2 Q.B. 222), and on error in a record of the
mayor's court of London (_Le Blanche_ v. _Heaton Telegram Co._, 1876, 1
Ex.D. 408); and from county courts under the Agricultural Holdings Acts
and Workmen's Compensation Acts; (5) appeals on questions of law from
decisions of the railway commissioners in England (Railway and Canal
Traffic Act 1888).

The court of appeal also exercises the lunacy jurisdiction of the lord
chancellor, but in regard to this the jurisdiction of the court is for
the most part original and not appellate.

The jurisdiction of the court of appeal is excluded or limited in the
following cases:--(1) judgments of the High Court--(a) where its
jurisdiction is consultative only; (b) where there is an appeal to the
High Court from an inferior court of civil jurisdiction; (c) where there
is an appeal to the High Court from any court of person, unless in cases
(b) and (c) leave be obtained of the court by which the order is made,
or of the court of appeal; (2) orders of the High Court in registration
and election cases except with the like leave; (3) orders made by
consent of parties, or as to costs only which by law are left to the
discretion of the court; (4) certain interlocutory orders mentioned in §
1 of the Supreme Court of Judicature (Procedure) Act 1894, except by
leave of the judge appealed from or of the court of appeal (5) orders of
the admiralty division in cases of prize, the appeal from which lies to
His Majesty in Council; (6) where the decision of any court whose
jurisdiction was transferred to the High Court is declared by statute to
be final; (7) matters which from their nature were not appealable to any
court before the Judicature Acts, or in which the court of appeal has no
means of enforcing or executing its judgment. For example, it was held
in the House of Lords, in _Cox_ v. _Hakes_, 1890, 15 A.C. 506, that no
appeal lies from the order of a judge discharging a prisoner under a
writ of _habeas corpus_. "If," said Lord Herschell, "the contention of
the respondent is to prevail, the statute has effected a grave
constitutional change"; and later, "if" the High Court "has inherited
the combined powers of the courts whose functions were transferred to
it, but none of them had any jurisdiction or authority to review a
discharge by a competent court under a writ of _habeas corpus_, or to
enforce the arrest of one thus freed from custody ... it seems to me to
follow, that however wrong the court of appeal might think a discharge
to have been, it would have been powerless to order a rearrest, or at
least to enforce such an order."

The procedure of the court of appeal is regulated by the rules of the
Supreme Court. A distinction is drawn between appeals from a final
judgment or order (which, unless the parties consent to a smaller
quorum, must be heard by three judges) and an appeal from an
interlocutory order (which may be determined by two judges of the court
of appeal).

In the case of appeals from a final or interlocutory "judgment," or from
an order, including applications for a new trial, the appeal must be
brought within three months from the time when the judgment or order is
signed, entered or otherwise perfected, or in the case of refusal of an
application from the date of refusal. The appeal is by notice of motion,
which except in cases of application for a new trial, need not state
the grounds of appeal. Fourteen clear days' notice of the motion must be
given by the appellant to the other party, the respondent.

In the case of appeals from an interlocutory order, or from a final
order, or from an order made in any matter which is not an action, or
from an order made in chambers, the appeal must be brought within
fourteen days by motion, of which four clear days' notice must be given
by the appellant to all parties directly affected by the appeal.
Controversies have arisen as to the meaning of the term "interlocutory,"
which (in the absence of any authoritative definition) the court of
appeal settles as they arise. The test most generally accepted is that a
judgment or order is final if, as made, it finally disposes of the
rights of the parties in a manner equally conclusive between them. The
court may by special leave allow appeals of either class to be brought
after the time above limited. The respondent may by proper notice bring
a cross appeal against any portion of the judgment or order made below
with which he is dissatisfied. The court has power to order the
appellant to find security for the costs of an appeal, if special
circumstances, such as insolvency or poverty or foreign domicile or the
like, make the giving of security desirable. The court of appeal
"rehears" the case. Under ordinary circumstances it does not permit a
new case to be set up inconsistent with the case as presented below; and
it is content with the judges' notes, or a transcript of the evidence
given below, and with a note or transcript of the judgment appealed
from, but has power on special grounds to receive fresh evidence either
_viva voce_ or on affidavit. The court may call in for its assistance
assessors who are experts on the matters of fact or science involved in
the appeal, and usually does so in cases arising out of collisions at
sea.

The court of appeal may make any order which it deems just as to the
costs of the whole or any part of an appeal, except possibly in the case
of certain appeals in matters on the crown side of the High Court, as to
which some doubt still exists. In practice the costs follow the event,
unless the court in a particular case makes an order to the contrary.

A decision of the court of appeal is final in appeals from the High
Court in bankruptcy, unless leave be given to appeal to the House of
Lords (§ 104, Bankruptcy Act 1883), and in divorce appeals, except where
the decision either is upon the grant or refusal of a decree for
dissolution or nullity of marriage, or for a declaration of legitimacy,
or is upon any question of law on which the court gives leave to appeal
(Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1881, § 9); but no further appeal to
the House of Lords lies, even with leave of the court of appeal, on
appeals from the High Court sitting as a court of appeal from county
courts in bankruptcy. With these exceptions there is now a right of
appeal from every order of the court of appeal to the House of Lords.

_The House of Lords._--The House of Lords has for centuries been the
court of last resort, and is still the final court of appeal from the
chief courts in the United Kingdom. The origin of the appellate
jurisdiction of the House of Lords was undoubtedly of that partly feudal
and partly popular character already alluded to, which made the suitor
seek from the high court of parliament the justice denied elsewhere in
the baronial courts or by the king's judges. The lords exercised the
mixed function of jurymen and judges, and, as in judgments on
impeachment, might be influenced by private or party considerations,
debating and dividing on the question before the House. A revolution was
silently accomplished, however, by which the function of reviewing the
decisions of the courts fell entirely to the lawyers raised to the
peerage, while the unprofessional lords only attended to give the
sanction of a quorum to the proceedings, and the House has always had
the right to invoke the assistance of the judges of the superior courts
to advise on the questions of law raised by an appeal. The letters and
memoirs, so late as Queen Anne's reign, show that party or personal
influence and persuasion were employed to procure votes on appeals, as
they have been in later times on railway or other local bills. The last
instance probably in which a strong division of opinion was manifested
among the unprofessional lords was the celebrated Douglas cause in 1769,
when the House was addressed by the dukes of Newcastle and Bedford, but
was led by the authoritative opinion of Lord Mansfield on the effect of
the evidence--an opinion which was treated rather as that of a political
partisan than of a judge. The case of Daniel O'Connell and others,
brought up on writ of error from the queen's bench in Ireland in 1844,
may be said to have finally established the precedent that the judgments
of the House of Lords were to be given solely by the law lords. On that
occasion there was a difference of opinion among the law lords
themselves. The judgment of the majority of the House was strongly
against the political feeling of the government and of the peers as a
body, while the law lords who carried the decision had been appointed by
previous governments opposed in politics to the existing cabinet. But
all these temptations to a party vote by the unprofessional members were
resisted.

By § 20 of the act of 1873, the appellate jurisdiction of the House of
Lords (so far as it affects England) was abolished, but this section was
repealed by the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876. Under that act and an
amending act of 1887, the appellate business of the House of Lords is
conducted solely by the law lords, though lay peers may still sit
(_Bradlaugh_ v. _Clarke_, 1882, 8 App. Cas. 354). No appeal may be heard
or determined except in the presence of not less than three of the
following persons:--(1) the lord chancellor; (2) the lords of appeal,
four of whom are appointed under the act from among persons who hold, or
have held, high judicial office, or, at the date of appointment, have
been in practice for not less than fifteen years as barristers in
England or Ireland, or as advocates in Scotland; (3) such peers of
parliament as hold, or have held, high judicial office. By "high
judicial office" is meant the office of lord chancellor of Great Britain
or Ireland, lord of appeal in ordinary, paid judge of the judicial
committee or member of that committee, or judge of one of the superior
courts of Great Britain or Ireland.

An appeal lies to the House of Lords (1) from any order or judgment of
the court of appeal in England except as above stated; (2) from a
judgment or order of any court in Scotland or Ireland from which error
or an appeal to the House of Lords lay by common law or statute
immediately before the 1st of November 1876. No appeals are heard from
the decision of courts in criminal cases. The House of Lords has an
indirect power by standing orders to admit appeals from Scotland or
Ireland which under former law or practice could not be admitted
(Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876, § 12). The procedure on appeals is
regulated by standing orders of the House. The proceedings are commenced
by petition of appeal, which must be lodged with the clerk of the
parliaments within one year from the date of the last judgment it
appealed from. Security for costs (£200) must be given by bond or
lodgment of the money, unless dispensed with by the House on the ground
of poverty (act of 1893). Each party lodges a printed case signed and
certified by counsel, containing a resumé of the matters to be discussed
and of the contentions for or against the allowance of the appeal. The
hearing is before three or more law lords, who may call in nautical
assessors in admiralty cases (acts of 1893 and 1894). It is not public
in the full sense of the term, as persons not concerned in the appeal
can attend only by consent of the House. The House pronounces the
judgment which in the opinion of the majority of the law lords should
have been pronounced below, and has jurisdiction in the case of all
appeals to give or refuse costs to the successful party. The costs of
the appeal if given are taxed by the officers of the House. The
jurisdiction as to costs does not directly arise under any statute (see
_West Ham Guardians_ v. _Bethnal Green Churchwardens_, 1896, A.C. 477).

_Appeals to the King in Council._--The decisions of ecclesiastical
courts when acting within the limits of their jurisdiction, and the
decisions of courts in the king's dominions outside the United Kingdom,
and of courts in foreign countries set up under the Foreign Jurisdiction
Acts, cannot be dealt with by the House of Lords or any of the ordinary
tribunals of any part of the United Kingdom. The power once claimed by
the court of king's bench in England to control the courts of Ireland
has lapsed, and its power to intervene in colonial cases is limited to
the grant of the writ of _habeas corpus_ to a possession in which no
court exists having power to issue that writ or one of like effect
(Habeas Corpus Act 1862). As regards all British possessions, the appeal
to the king in council is in its origin and nature like that of the
provincials unto Caesar, and flows from the royal prerogative to admit
appeals. With the growth of the British empire it has been found
necessary to create a comparatively constant and stable tribunal to
advise the king in the exercise of this prerogative. For this purpose
the judicial committee of the privy council was created in 1833. In
1851, and again in 1870, it was reorganized, and by acts of 1876, 1887
and 1898 it received its present form. The committee consists of the
president of the council, and of the following persons, if privy
councillors--the lord chancellor and ex-chancellors of Great Britain and
of Ireland, the four lords of appeal in ordinary, the lords justices of
appeal in England or retired lords justices of appeal in England, and
persons who hold or have held the office (a) of judge of the High Court
of Justice or the court of appeal in England or Ireland, or of the court
of session in Scotland; (b) any person who is or has been chief justice
or a judge of the Supreme Court of Canada or of a superior court of any
province of Canada, of any of the Australian states (except Fiji and
Papua), or of New Zealand or the Cape of Good Hope or Natal. The number
of persons of this class who may be members at once is limited to five
(1895, c. 44); (c) provision is also made for the payment of two privy
councillors who have been judges in India who attend the privy council.

Numerous as are the members of the committee, the quorum is three. One
or more of the lords of appeal in ordinary usually attend at every
hearing, but the composition of the committee is very fluctuating.
Appeals from the British dominions abroad lie in criminal as well as
civil matters. The right of appeal is regulated as to most possessions
by order in council, and in some cases is limited by imperial or
colonial statute. Appeals are on fact as well as on law, but the
committee rarely if ever disturbs the concurrent judgments on facts of
two colonial courts. In the case of admiralty appeals from colonial or
consular courts, naval assessors may be called in. The committee also
hears (with the aid of ecclesiastical assessors) appeals from
ecclesiastical courts. The judgment of the committee is in the form of a
report and advice to the king, which is read by one of the members
sitting, and no indication is given as to whether the members present
are unanimous. Effect is given to the advice by orders in council
dismissing or allowing the appeal, and giving direction as to the
payment of costs and as to the further proceedings to be taken in the
colonial courts.

The procedure of the committee is on the same lines as that on appeals
to the House of Lords; no well-arranged code of practice existed however
up to the end of 1908, and new rules were then being proposed on the
subject. The appeal is commenced by a petition of appeal, and by the
giving of security for costs. In colonial appeals printed cases are
lodged containing a summary of the contentions of the parties, and with
this a printed copy of the record of the proceedings and documents used
in the courts appealed from. The hearing is in the privy council chamber
and is not public. When an appeal is called on, the counsel and parties
are summoned into the chamber, and when the arguments are concluded they
are requested to retire. The appeals to the king in council from
colonial states having a federal constitution, like Canada and
Australia, stand in an exceptional position. The act creating the
Supreme Court of Canada purports to make the decision of that court
final. But it is still the practice to admit by special leave a
prerogative appeal from the court, and to entertain appeals from courts
of the provinces of Canada direct to the king in council, without
requiring them to go to the Supreme Court. The constitution of the
Australian Commonwealth contemplates (§ 73) the possibility of
restricting appeals to the king in council from the supreme courts of
Australia, and sec. 74 forbids appeals to the king in council except by
leave of the High Court of Australia from decision of that court on any
question however arising as to the limits _inter se_ of the
constitutional powers of the commonwealth and those of any state or
states, or as to the limits _inter se_ of the constitutional powers of
any two or more states. The exact effect of these enactments and of
Australian legislation under § 73 is a matter of controversy.

_Scotland._--In Scotland the ordinary appellate tribunal for decisions
of inferior courts and of the lords ordinary is the court of session,
which for appellate purposes sits in two divisions. Appeals from
inferior tribunals in criminal cases go before the judges of the court
of session sitting in the High Court of Justiciary. The court of session
was in its original constitution a committee of parliament for the
performance of its judicial functions, and an appeal to parliament was
consequently anomalous. In the reign of Charles II., however, the courts
grew so intolerably corrupt that a determined effort was made to have
their judgments overturned, by an appeal which was strictly of the old
character of a cry for protection against flagrant injustice. It was
called a "protest for remeid of law," and was inserted as one of the
national claims in the Petition of Right at the revolution. The treaty
of union is silent as to appeals, though definitely excluding the right
of English courts to interfere with Scottish courts or cases. The House
of Lords has since the Union acted without challenge as the final
appellate tribunal for Scotland in civil causes; but has always declined
jurisdiction in Scottish criminal cases.

_Ireland._--The Supreme Court of Judicature (Ireland) Acts have
remodelled the courts and appellate system of Ireland on the same lines
as those of England. The High Court of Justice in Ireland now consists
of two divisions only, the chancery division, which has little or no
appellate functions, and the king's bench division, which has for
Ireland substantially the same power of reviewing and correcting the
decisions of inferior courts as has the corresponding court in England.
To this there is one exception, that appeals from a county court in
Ireland may be heard on circuit by a single judge of assize. In Ireland
there is also a court of appeal, created in 1877, whose jurisdiction and
procedure follow the same lines as that of the English court of appeal.

_France._--The court of last resort in France for all cases, whether
civil or criminal (_en matière criminelle, correctionnelle et de
police_), is the _cour de cassation_, which sits in Paris. It is a court
of error for the review of all judgments of tribunals of last resort
(except _juges de paix_ in certain cases), and for the transfer of
causes from one court to another when justice so demands, and to
determine conflicts of jurisdiction (Law 1 Dec. 1790). Ordinarily it is
confined to errors of law and procedure, but where evidence not
available below is brought before the court, it may send the case back
for retrial or give the appropriate final judgment, as in the case of
Dreyfus (1906). It also hears appeals from courts martial.

Next to the _cour de cassation_ are the courts of appeal, which have
jurisdiction to hear appeals (1) in civil matters from courts of first
instance, _juges de paix_, and where the amount in dispute exceeds £60
from commercial courts, _tribunaux de commerce_ (Civil Proc. Code, arts.
443-475); (2) in criminal matters from _tribunaux correctionnels_ (Com.
Proc. Code, arts. 202-235). The appeal is both on fact and on law, and
applies to interlocutory or preparatory as well as to final judgments.

_Spain._--In Spain the jurisdiction and procedure with reference to
appeals is on the same lines as in France. As regards civil matters it
is regulated by title 21 of the Civil Procedure Code. The appeal to the
supreme court is for the most part on questions of law (_por infraccion
de ley o de doctrina_); but the court has also power to review judgments
on materials not available at the first hearing (arts. 1796, 1801).

_British India._--In British India complete and systematic provision is
made for appeals both in civil and in criminal cases by the Procedure
Codes (Civil of 1882, with subsequent amendments, and Criminal of 1898),
and also to some extent by the charters of the high courts of Calcutta,
Bombay and Madras (see Ilbert, _Government of India_, Oxford, 1898, p.
137). In addition, the decisions of subordinate tribunals may be revised
by a superior tribunal _proprio motu_, or reviewed in a proper case by
the tribunal which has given them; and provision is made for the
consultation of a superior by an inferior tribunal in cases of legal
difficulty. The policy of admitting so many appeals has been criticized.
But with an enormous population which has no representative institutions
it has been deemed wise to provide ample means of correcting judicial
errors at the instance not only of the aggrieved person but also at the
instance of the supervising judicial authorities, as a means of ensuring
regularity and propriety in the conduct of judicial business by
subordinate judges in out-of-the-way districts.

_Civil Appeals._--(1) Except where otherwise expressly provided by the
Civil Procedure Code, or by any other law for the time being in force,
an appeal lies from the whole or part of any decree, whether made _ex
parte_ or _inter partes_, of a court exercising original jurisdiction
(Civil Procedure Code, § 540). By "decree" is meant the final expression
of an adjudication upon a right claimed or defence set up in a civil
court, when such adjudication, so far as regards the court expressing
it, decides the suit (§ 2). The appeal is both on facts and on law. The
procedure on the appeal is prescribed by c. 41 of the Civil Procedure
Code, and the directions of the code deal even with the language of the
judgment on appeal and the matters to be stated therein. (2) Decrees
passed on an appeal to any court in India subordinate to a High Court
are as a general rule subject to appeal to the High Court on the grounds
(a) that they are contrary to a specified law, or usage having the force
of law; (b) that they have failed to determine some material issue of
law, or usage having the force of law; (c) of substantial error or
defect in procedure prescribed by the code or other law which might
possibly have produced error or defect in the decision of the case upon
the merits (§ 584). The procedure on these appeals is regulated by c. 42
of the Civil Procedure Code. (3) Appeals from orders which do not fall
within the definition of decrees are allowed in the cases specified in §
588 of the code. The procedure with respect to these appeals is on the
same lines as that on appeals against decrees (§ 590). Provision is made
(by c. 44) for allowing appeals _in forma pauperis_ after certain
preliminary inquiries. In the High Courts appeals lie from the decision
of one judge to two or more judges of the High Court, whose decision has
effect as a judgment of the full court. Appeals, in civil cases, from
the courts of India to the king in council are regulated by c. 45 of the
Civil Procedure Code. The appealable amount is for most cases Rs. 10,000
or a claim or question as to property of like amount.

Besides the provisions stated as to appeals, Indian courts have power in
certain contingencies to review their own decisions (§ 623). An inferior
court may also refer cases of difficulty to the High Court on a
statement of the facts as found in the referring court and of the
opinion thereon of that Court (§§ 617-620); and in cases in which no
appeal lies to the High Court, that court may call for the record of any
case in which the court below appears to have acted without jurisdiction
or failed to exercise its jurisdiction, or to have exercised its
jurisdiction illegally or with material illegality (§ 622).

_Criminal Matters._--Criminal jurisdiction in India is exercised by
magistrates of the first, second and third class, by sessions courts,
and the high or chief courts of the presidencies or provinces (Criminal
Procedure Code of 1898). The higher judges in a district have the power
of revising those decisions which are not absolutely summary of the
judges of the classes below them in the same district; i.e. the sessions
judge can revise the decisions of a first-class magistrate, and the High
Court those of a sessions judge (§ 435). Inferior tribunals can also
refer questions of law to the High Court (§§ 432, 433); and where a
sentence of death is passed, or a sessions judge differs from the jury
(§ 307), the matter must be referred to the High Court. On matters of
reference or revision the parties have no right to be heard.

Provision is also made for appeals by c. 31 of the Code. Appeals from
second- or third-class magistrates are dealt with by the district
(first-class) magistrate (§ 407). Persons convicted on trial by
assistant sessions judges or first-class magistrates, except in cases
where the punishment is very small, have an appeal to the sessions judge
(§§ 408, 413). A person convicted on trial by the sessions judge has an
appeal to the High Court (§ 410), but where he has pleaded guilty the
only point on which appeal is open is the legality or extent of sentence
(§ 412). Special provision is made as to appeals by persons born in
Europe (whether British subjects or not) and Americans (§§ 408, 415, and
c. 33).

In criminal cases there is a right of appeal to the king in council in
certain cases provided for by the charters of the chartered high courts
(see Ilbert, _Government of India_, Oxford, 1898, p. 137).

An appeal also lies in certain cases from the courts of British officers
in feudatory states of India to a high court in India, and from the
courts of Aden and Zanzibar and British East Africa to the High Court of
Bombay. Appeals do not lie from the courts of native states to British
courts in India, though in some cases there is an appeal of a political
rather than judicial nature from the judicial tribunals of feudatory
states; e.g. in the case of Kathiawar (_Hemchand Derchand_ v. _Azam
Sakarlal_; 1906. L.R. A.C. 212).

_Canada._--In Canada each province has the regulation of its own courts
of justice. In Ontario the judiciary are organized, under the Provincial
Judicature Acts, in much the same manner as in England; and the review
of decisions of inferior courts (by appeal or other proceedings based on
English practice) is in the hands of the High Court of Justice, subject
to appeal to the provincial court of appeal. In Quebec the highest court
(king's bench), besides its original jurisdiction, has appellate
jurisdiction over the superior court (see Quebec Civil Procedure Code,
art. 1114 _et seq_.). The jurisdiction is exercised by writ of error or
by appeal, according to the nature of the decision appealed from. The
judges of the superior court have also, under art. 494, power to review
before three judges decisions of a judge of that court or of a circuit
court (arts. 494-504). Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Manitoba and British
Columbia have supreme courts with appellate authority over decisions of
single judges of the court and over inferior tribunals in the province.
Appeals lie from the highest courts of each province, in civil matters,
to the Supreme Court of Canada, or to the king in council in cases
falling within the orders in council applying to each province, but in
criminal matters to the king in council. From the Supreme Court of
Canada no appeal lies as of right to the king in council (Dominion Act
1875, 38 Vic. c. 11, § 47), and the royal prerogative of granting
special leave to appeal is sparingly exercised. The principles on which
the judicial committee acts in advising for or against the grant of
special leave in civil case& are stated in _Daily Telegraph Newspaper
Co._ v. _M'Laughlin_, 1904, L.R. A.C. 776. It is, however, as before,
quite common for appeals to be brought direct to the privy council from
the provincial courts without resort to the Dominion court (see Wheeler,
_Privy Council Law_, p. 955).

_Australia._--Each of the states of the Australian Commonwealth has its
own supreme court. The Commonwealth parliament constituted in 1903 a
High Court for Australia, which, besides its original federal
jurisdiction, is also a court of appeal from the supreme courts of the
constitutional states, or from any state court from which an appeal lay
to the king in council at the establishment of the Commonwealth. The
jurisdiction of the court is defined by the Judiciary Act of 1903, by
which it is created. The right of appeal is given both as to criminal
and civil matters.

_South Africa._--In Cape Colony and Natal the appellate courts are the
supreme courts, subject to further appeal in certain cases to the king
in council. The superior courts of Cape Colony are empowered to review
the proceedings of all inferior courts in the colony and its
dependencies in cases where no appeal lies. There was for a time an
appeal from the High Court of Orange River Colony to the supreme court
of the Transvaal, and from that court (whether acting for its own colony
or on appeal from the Orange Colony), an appeal to the king in council.
In other colonies the provisions as to appeal follow more or less
closely the lines of English law and procedure as to appeals, and in all
cases the ultimate appeal is to the king in council.

_United States._--In the American courts the term "appeal" covers (1) a
removal of a cause to a higher court for retrial on all the questions of
law or fact involved, or (2) taking up points of law only by proceedings
in error, for revision by a higher court. Decrees in admiralty,
bankruptcy and equity, in the federal courts, are the subjects of an
appeal; judgments in actions at law, of a writ of error. On an equity
appeal the evidence taken at the original hearing is reported at length
to the appellate court, and it has the right to review the conclusions
of fact reached by the court below and come to different ones. This,
however, is seldom done, the appeal being almost always decided on
points of law based upon the conclusions of fact reached in the original
hearing. In admiralty appeals the conclusions of fact reached by the
trial court are specially set forth, and are final.

"Appeal" in many of the states is the general term for reviewing any
judgment of an inferior court on assignments of error. It is also often
used to signify a mode of reviewing proceedings of municipal bodies,
affecting the interests of particular persons, e.g. in matters of
licences or assessments.

In criminal prosecutions an appeal, or writ of error on points of law,
is almost everywhere allowed by statute to the defendant, and often to
the state. (_United States_ v. _Sanges_, 144 United States Reports, 310;
_State_ v. _Lee_, 65 Connecticut Reports, 265.)

By the constitution of the United States the Supreme Court is vested
with "appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such
exceptions, and under such regulations, as the Congress shall make."
This provision is held not to create but only to authorize the creation
of the jurisdiction. In the words of Chancellor Kent, "If congress had
not provided any rule to regulate the proceedings in appeal, the court
could not exercise an appellate jurisdiction: and, if a rule be
provided, the court could not depart from it." In pursuance of this
principle, the Supreme Court decided in _Clarke_ v. _Bazadone_ that a
writ of error did not lie to that court from a court of the United
States territory north-west of the Ohio, because the act had not
authorized an appeal or writ of error from such a court (_Commentaries_,
i. 324). The appellate jurisdiction of the court is now regulated by
title 13 chap. ii. of the Revised Statutes of the United States (1873),
§§ 690-710; and by the acts enumerated at p. 901 of the Revised
Statutes, United States, 1873 to 1891. Under these statutes the Supreme
Court may entertain appeals from the highest court of a state of the
Union, but only (1) where the state court has decided against the
validity of a treaty or statute of the United States, or of an authority
exercised under the United States; (2) where a state court has affirmed
the validity of a statute, or of an authority exercised which has been
challenged on the ground of repugnance to the constitution, laws or
treaties of the United States; (3) where the state court has decided
against the existence of a title, right, privilege, or immunity claimed
or set up under the constitution of, or under any statute, treaty,
commission or authority of the United States.

The appeal from state courts is by writ of error, i.e. on law only; and
applies as well in criminal as in civil cases. The Supreme Court will
not act unless the federal question was raised in the court below
(_Chicago U.S. Mail Co._ v. _McGuire_, 1904, 196, U.S. 128). The circuit
court of appeals, established in 1891, deals with appeals from the
district and circuit courts of the United States, except where other
provision is made, e.g. where the jurisdiction of the court appealed
from is in question; in prize causes and convictions of capital crimes
(U.S. Statutes, 1801, c. 54. § 5); in cases involving the construction
or application of the constitution; in cases arising in district or
circuit courts involving the constitutional questions already stated as
subject of appeal from state courts.

The review by the circuit court of appeals is effected by appeal or by
writ of error, and its decision is final, with certain exceptions but
with power to certify cases to the Supreme Court for instructions (1891,
c. 511, § 6).

The Supreme Court hears appeals from the circuit court of appeals within
the limits above stated, and appeals from the circuit and district
courts in cases in which an appeal does not lie to the circuit court of
appeals, and has power to issue a _certiorari_ to transfer a case from
the circuit court of Appeals.     (W. F. C.)