APPERCEPTION (Lat. _ad_ and _percipere_, perceive), in psychology, a
term used to describe the presentation of an object on which attention
is fixed, in relation to the sum of consciousness previous to the
presentation and the mind as a whole. The word was first used by
Leibnitz, practically in the sense of the modern Attention (q.v.), by
which an object is apprehended as "not-self" and yet in relation to the
self. In Kantian terminology apperception is (1) _transcendental_--the
perception of an object as involving the consciousness of the pure self
as subject, and (2) _empirical_,--the cognition of the self in its
concrete existence. In (1) apperception is almost equivalent to
self-consciousness; the existence of the ego may be more or less
prominent, but it is always involved. According to J.F. Herbart (q.v.)
apperception is that process by which an aggregate or "mass" of
presentations becomes systematized (_apperceptions-system_) by the
accretion of new elements, either sense-given or product of the inner
workings of the mind. He thus emphasizes in apperception the connexion
with the self as resulting from the sum of antecedent experience. Hence
in education the teacher should fully acquaint himself with the mental
development of the pupil, in order that he may make full use of what the
pupil already knows.

Apperception is thus a general term for all mental processes in which a
presentation is brought into connexion with an already existent and
systematized mental conception, and thereby is classified, explained or,
in a word, understood; e.g. a new scientific phenomenon is explained in
the light of phenomena already analysed and classified. The whole
intelligent life of man is, consciously or unconsciously, a process of
apperception, inasmuch as every act of attention involves the
appercipient process.

  See Karl Lange, _Ueber Apperception_ (6th ed. revised, Leipzig, 1899;
  trans. E.E. Brown, Boston, 1893); G.F. Stout, _Analytic Psychology_
  (London, 1896), bk. ii. ch. viii., and in general text-books of
  psychology; also PSYCHOLOGY.