APPENZELL, one of the cantons of north-east Switzerland, entirely
surrounded by the canton of St Gall; both were formed out of the
dominions of the prince abbots of St Gall, whence the name Appenzell
(_abbatis cello_). It is an alpine region, particularly in its south
portion, where rises the Alpstein limestone range (culminating in the
Säntis, 8216 ft.), though towards the north the surface is composed
rather of green hills, separating green hollows in which nestle neat
villages and small towns. It is mainly watered by two streams that
descend from the Säntis, the Urnasch joining the Sitter (on which is the
capital, Appenzell), which later flows into the Thur. There are light
railways from Appenzell to St Gall either (12½ m.) past Gais or (20½ m.)
past Herisau, as well as lines from St Gall to Trogen (6 m.) and from
Rorschach to Heiden (4¼ m.). Since 1597 it has been divided, for
religious reasons, into two half-cantons, which are quite independent of
each other, and differ in many points.

The north and west portion or _Ausser Rhoden_ has a total area of 93.6
sq. m. (of which 90.6 are classed as "productive"; forests covering 22.5
sq. m. and glaciers .038 sq. m.), with a population (in 1900) of 55,281,
mainly German-speaking, and containing 49,797 Protestants as against
5418 Romanists. Its political capital is Trogen (q.v.), though the
largest town is Herisau (q.v.), while Teufen has 4595 inhabitants, and
Heiden (3745 inhabitants) in the north-east corner is the most
frequented of the many goats' whey cure resorts for which the entire
canton is famous (Urnäsch and Gais are also in Ausser Rhoden). This
half-canton is divided into three administrative districts, comprising
twenty communes, and is mainly industrial, the manufacture of cotton
goods, muslins, and embroidery being very flourishing. It sends one
member (elected by the _Landsgemeinde_) to the federal _Ständerath_ and
three to the federal _Nationalrath_ (elected by a direct popular vote).

The south or more mountainous portion of Appenzell forms the half-canton
of Appenzell, _Inner Rhoden_. It has a total area of 66.7 sq. m. (of
which 62.8 sq. m. are classed as "productive," forests covering 12.8 sq.
m. and glaciers .38 sq. m.), and a total population of 13,499,
practically all German-speaking, and all but 833 Romanists. Its
political capital is Appenzell (q.v.), which is also the largest
village, while Weissbad (near it) and Gonten are the best-known goats'
whey cure resorts. Embroidery and muslins are made in this half-canton,
though wholly at home by the work-people. But it is very largely
pastoral, containing 168 mountain pastures or "alps," maintaining each
summer 4000 cows, and of an estimated capital value of 2,682,955 francs
(the figures for Ausser Rhoden are respectively 100 alps, 2800 cows, and
1,749,900 francs). Inner Rhoden is extremely conservative, and has the
reputation of always rejecting any federal _Referendum_. For similar
reasons it has preserved many old customs and costumes, those of the
women being very elaborate and picturesque, while the herdsmen have
retained their festival attire of red waistcoats, embroidered braces and
canary-coloured shorts. It sends one member (named by the
_Landsgemeinde_) to the federal _Ständerath_, and one also to the
federal _Nationalrath_, while it forms but a single administrative
district, though divided into six communes.

To the outer world the canton of Appenzell is best known by its
institution of _Landsgemeinden_, or primitive democratic assemblies held
in the open air, in which every male citizen (not being disqualified)
over twenty years of age must (under a money penalty) appear personally:
each half-canton has such an assembly of its own, that of Inner Rhoden
always meeting at Appenzell, and that of Ausser Rhoden in the odd years
at Hundwil (near Herisau) and in the even years at Trogen. This
institution is of immemorial antiquity, and the meetings in either case
are always held on the last Sunday in April. The _Landsgemeinde_ is the
supreme legislative authority, and elects both the executive (in Inner
Rhoden composed of nine members and called _Ständeskommission_, and in
Ausser Rhoden of seven members and called _Regierungsrath_) and the
president or _Landammann_; in each half-canton there is also a sort of
standing committee (composed of the members of the executive and
representatives from the communes--in Inner Rhoden one member per 250 or
fraction over 125 of the population, and in Ausser Rhoden one member per
1000 of the inhabitants) which prepares business for the _Landsgemeinde_
and decides minor matters; in Inner Rhoden it is named the _Grossrath_
and in Ausser Rhoden the _Kantonsrath_. As various old-fashioned
ceremonies are observed at the meetings and the members each appear with
his girded sword, the sight of a meeting of the _Landsgemeinde_ is most
striking and interesting. The existing constitution of Inner Rhoden
dates mainly from 1872, and that of Ausser Rhoden from 1876.

By the middle of the 11th century the abbots of St Gall had established
their power in the land later called Appenzell, which, too, became
thoroughly teutonized, its early inhabitants having probably been
romanized Raetians. But as early as 1377, this portion of the abbots'
domains formed an alliance with the Swabian free imperial cities and
adopted a constitution of its own. The repeated attempts of the abbots
to put down this independence of their rule were defeated in the
battles of Vögelinsegg (1403), north-west of Trogen, and of the Stoss
(1405), the pass leading from Gais over to Altstätten in the Rhine
valley. In 1411 Appenzell was placed under the "protection" of the Swiss
Confederation, of which, in 1452, it became an "allied member," and in
1513 a full member. Religious differences broke up the land after the
Reformation into two portions, each called _Rhoden_, a term that in the
singular is said to mean a "clearing," and occurs in 1070, long before
the final separation. From 1798 to 1803 Appenzell, with the other
domains of the abbot of St Gall, was formed into the canton Säntis of
the Helvetic Republic, but in 1803, on the creation of the new canton of
St Gall, shrank back within its former boundaries. The oldest codes of
the laws and customs of the land date from 1409 and 1585, the original
MS. of the latter (called the "Silver Book" from its silver clasps)
being still used in Inner Rhoden when, at the close of the annual
_Landsgemeinde_, the newly elected _Landammann_ first takes the oath of
office, and the assembled members then take that of obedience to him, in
either case with uplifted right hands.

  See also _Appenzellische Jahrbücher_ (3 series from 1854, Trogen); G.
  Baumberger, "_Juhu-Juuhu_"--_Appenzellerland und Appenzellerleut_
  (Einsiedeln, 1903); J.G. Ebel, _Schilderung d. Gebirgsvolker d.
  Schweiz_, vol. i. (Leipzig, 1798); W. Kobelt, _Die Alpwirthschaft im
  Kant. App. Inner Rhoden_ (Soleure, 1899); I.B. Richman, _Appenzell_
  (London, 1895); H. Ryffel, _Die schweiz. Landsgemeinden_ (Zürich,
  1903); J.J. Tobler and A. Strüby, _Die Alpwirthschaft im Kant. App.
  Ausser Rhoden_ (Soleure, 1900); J.C. Zellweger, _Geschichte d. app.
  Volkes_ (to 1597), 6 vols in 11 parts (Trogen, 1830-1838); J.C.
  Zellweger, junior, _Der Kant. App._. (Trogen, 1867); A. Tobler, _Das
  Volkslied im Appenzellerland_ (Basel, 1906); J.J. Blumer, _Staats- und
  Rechtsgeschichte d. schweiz. Demokratien_ (3 vols. St Gall,
  1850-1859).     (W. A. B. C.)