APPIA, VIA, a high-road leading from Rome to Campania and lower Italy,
constructed in 312 B.C. by the censor Appius Claudius Caecus. It
originally ran only as far as Capua, but was successively prolonged to
Beneventum, Venusia, Tarentum and Brundusium, though at what dates is
unknown. Probably it was extended as far as Beneventum not long after
the colonization of this town in 268 B.C., and it seems to have reached
Venusia before 190 B.C. Horace, in the journey to Brundusium described
in _Sat_. i. 5, followed the Via Appia as far as Beneventum, but not
beyond.

The original road was no doubt only gravelled (_glarea strata_); in 298
B.C. a footpath was laid _saxo quadrato_ from the Porta Capena, by which
it left Rome, to the temple of Mars, about 1 m. from the gate. Three
years later, however, the whole road was paved with _silex_ from the
temple to Bovillae, and in 191 B.C. the first mile from the gate to the
temple was similarly treated. The distance from Rome to Capua was 132 m.
For the first few miles the road is flanked by an uninterrupted series
of tombs and other buildings (see L. Canina, _Via Appia_, Rome, 1853).
As far as Terracina it ran in an almost entirely straight line, even
through the Alban Hills, where the gradients are steep. A remarkably
fine embankment belonging to it still exists at Aricia. At Forum Appii
it entered the Pomptine Marshes; that this portion (19 m. long, hence
called Decennovium) belonged to the original road was proved by the
discovery at Ad Medias (Mesa) of a milestone of about 250 B.C. (Ch.
Hülsen, in _Römische Mitteilungen_, 1889, 83; 1895, 301). A still older
road ran along the foot of the Volscian mountains past Cora, Norba and
Setia; this served as the post road until the end of the 18th century.
At the time of Strabo and Horace, however, it was the practice to travel
by canal from Forum Appii to Lucus Feroniae; to Nerva and Trajan were
due the paving of the road and the repair of the bridges along this
section. Theodoric in A.D. 486 ordered the execution of similar repairs,
the success of which is recorded in inscriptions, but in the middle ages
it was abandoned and impassable, and was only renewed by Pius VI. The
older road crossed the back of the promontory at the foot of which
Terracina stands; in imperial times, probably, the rock was cut away
perpendicularly for a height of 120 ft. to allow the road to pass.
Beyond Fundi it passed through the mountains to Formiae, the engineering
of the road being noteworthy; and thence by Minturnae and Sinuessa
(towns of the Aurunci which had been conquered in 314 B.C.)[1] to Capua.
The remains of the road in this first portion are particularly striking.

Between Capua and Beneventum, a distance of 32 m., the road passed near
the defile of Caudium (see CAUDINE FORKS). The modern highroad follows
the ancient line, and remains of the latter, with the exception of three
well-preserved bridges, which still serve for the modern highroad, are
conspicuous by their absence. The portion of the road from Rome to
Beneventum is described by Sir R. Colt Hoare, _Classical Tour through
Italy_, 57 seq. (London, 1819). He was accompanied on his journey, made
in 1789, by the artist Carlo Labruzzi, who executed a series of 226
drawings, the greater part of which have not been published; they are
described by T. Ashby in _Mélanges de l'École Française de Rome_ (1903),
p. 375 seq., and _Atti del Congresso Internazionale per le Scienze
Storiche_, vol. v. (Rome, 1904), p. 125 seq.

From Beneventum to Brundusium by the Via Appia, through Venusia and
Tarentum, was 202 m. A shorter route, but more fitted for mule traffic,
though Horace drove along part of it,[2] ran by Aequum Tuticum, Aecae,
Herdoniae, Canusium, Barium, and Gnatia (Strabo vi. 282); it was made
into a main road by Trajan, and took the name Via Traiana. The original
road, too, adopted in imperial times a more devious but easier route by
Aeclanum instead of by Trevicum. This was restored by Hadrian for the 15
m. between Beneventum and Aeclanum. Under Diocletian and Maximian a road
(the Via Herculia) was constructed from Aequum Tuticum to Pons Aufidi
near Venusia, where it crossed the Via Appia and went on into Lucania,
passing through Potentia and Grumentum, and joining the Via Popilia near
Nerulum. Though it must have lost much of its importance through the
construction of the Via Traiana, the last portion from Tarentum to
Brundusium was restored by Constantine about A.D. 315.

  The Via Appia was the most famous of Roman roads; Statius, _Silvae_,
  ii. 2. 12, calls it _longarum regina viarum_. It was administered
  under the empire by a curator of praetorian rank, as were the other
  important roads of Italy. A large number of milestones and other
  inscriptions relating to its repair at various times are known. See
  Ch. Hülsen in Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyclopadie_, ii. 238 seq.
  (Stuttgart, 1896).     (T. As.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] It is important to note how the Romans followed up every victory
    with a road.

  [2] From Beneventum he followed the older line of the Via Appia to
    Trevicum; thence, leaving the main road at Aquilonia, he went to
    Ausculum ("quod versu dicere non est"), the mod. Ascoli Satriano, by
    a by-road, for the milestones which have been found there, though
    they probably belong to the Via Traiana, cannot be in their original
    position, but must have been transplanted thither (Th. Mommsen in
    _Corp. Inscrip. Lat._, ix. 1883, No. 6016)--and on to Herdoniae (why
    Mommsen says that he left Herdoniae on the left, _op. cit._ p. 592,
    is not clear), where he joined the line of the later Via Traiana.