APPOINTMENT, POWER OF, in English law, an authority reserved by or
limited to a person, to dispose, either wholly or partially, of real or
personal property, either for his own benefit or for that of others.
Thus if A settle property upon trustees to such uses as B shall by deed
or will appoint and in default of and until such appointment to the use
of C and his heirs, B, though he has no interest in the property, can at
any time appoint the property to any one he pleases, including himself,
and C's interest which has hitherto been vested in him will be divested.
In the above case A is said to be the donor, B the donee, and the
persons in whose favour the appointment is exercised are called the
appointees. Such powers are either general or limited. A general power
is one which the appointor may exercise in favour of any person he
pleases. It is obvious that such a power is very nearly equivalent to
ownership, and consequently property which is the subject of a general
power has been made to share the liabilities of ownership. By the
Judgments Act 1838 all hereditaments over which a judgment debtor has
such a power may be seized by the sheriff under a writ of _elegit_, and
by the Bankruptcy Act 1883 similar property will vest in the trustees of
a bankrupt. By the Finance Act 1894 property of which the deceased had a
general power of appointment is subject to the payment of estate duty,
even though the power has not been exercised. A limited power is one
which can only be exercised in favour of certain specified persons or
classes; such a power is frequently inserted in marriage settlements in
which after life estates to the husband and wife a power is given to
appoint among the children of the marriage. In such a case no
appointment to any one but children of the marriage is valid. Formerly
it was held that the intention of the donor of such a power was that
each of the class which are the objects of the power should take some
part of the fund, and from this arose the equitable doctrine of illusory
appointments, by which the courts of equity set aside an appointment
which was good at law on the ground that a merely nominal share had been
appointed to one of the objects. The great difficulty of deciding what
was a nominal or illusory share caused the passing of the Illusory
Appointments Act of 1830, whereby it was enacted that no appointment
should be set aside merely on the ground that a share appointed was
illusory. It was still necessary, however, that some share should be
appointed to each object, and consequently it was possible in the
popular phrase to be "cut off with a shilling," but now by the Powers
Amendment Act 1874 the appointor is no longer obliged to appoint a share
to each object of the power.

It is a general rule that every circumstance required by the instrument
creating the power to accompany the execution of it must be strictly
observed. Thus it might be required that the appointment should be by an
instrument witnessed by four witnesses, or that the consent in writing
of some third party should be signified. The general rule, however, has
been modified both by statute and by the rules of equity. By the Wills
Act 1837 a will made pursuant to the requirements of that statute shall
be a valid execution of a power of appointment by will, notwithstanding
that some additional form or solemnity shall have been required by the
instrument creating the power, and by the Wills Act 1861 a will made out
of the United Kingdom by a British subject according to the forms
required by the law of the place where the will was made shall, as
regards personal estate, be held to be well executed and admitted to
probate; consequently it has been held that an appointment made by such
a will is a valid exercise of the power. As regards appointments by deed
the Law of Property Amendment Act 1859 enacts that a deed attested by
two witnesses shall, so far as execution and attestation go, be a valid
exercise of a power to appoint by deed. The courts of equity also will
interfere in some cases of defective execution in order to carry out the
intentions of the settlor. The principle upon which the court acts is
obscure, but the rule has been thus stated:--"Whenever a man having
power over an estate, whether ownership or not, in discharge of moral or
natural relations, shows an intention to execute such power, the court
will operate upon the conscience of the heir (or of the persons entitled
in default) to make him perfect this intention." Equity, however, only
relieves against defects not of the essence of the power, such as the
absence of seal or execution by will instead of deed, but where the
defect is of the essence of the power, as where a consent is not
obtained, equity will not assist, nor will it relieve where a power to
appoint by will is purported to be exercised by deed. A power of
appointment if exercised must be exercised bona fide, otherwise it will
be void as fraudulent; thus it has been frequently decided that where a
father, having a limited power of appointment among his children,
appoints the whole fund to an infant child, who is in no need of the
appointment and who is ill, in the expectation of the death of the child
whereby the fund will come to him as next of kin, such appointment is
void as a fraud upon the power. Where an execution is partly fraudulent
and partly valid the court will, if possible, separate the two and only
revoke that which is fraudulent; if, however, the two parts are not
separable the whole is void. The same rule is applied in cases of
excessive execution where the power is exercised in favour of persons
some of whom are and some of whom are not objects of the power. The
doctrine of _Election_ (q.v.) applies to appointments under powers, but
there must be a gift of free and disposable property to the persons
entitled in default of appointment.

The appointment must in law be read into the instrument creating the
power in lieu of the power itself. Thus an appointor under a limited
power cannot appoint to any person to whom the donor could not have
appointed by reason of the rule against perpetuities, but this is not so
in the case of a general power, for there the appointor is virtually
owner of the property appointed. In applying this rule to appointments a
distinction arises between powers created by deed and will, for a deed
speaks from the date of its execution but a will from the death of the
testator, and so limitations bad when the will was made may have become
good when it comes into operation. Since the Conveyancing Act 1881 all
powers may be released by the donees thereof, unless the power is
coupled with a trust in respect of which there is a duty cast on the
donee to exercise it; and this is so even though the donee gets a
benefit by such release as one entitled in default of appointment, for
this is not a fraud upon the power.     (E. S. M. B.)