APPORTIONMENT (Fr. _apportionement;_ Med. Lat. _apportionamentum;_
derived from Lat. portio, share), distribution or allotment in proper
shares; a term used in law in a variety of senses, (1) Sometimes it is
employed roughly and with no technical meaning to indicate the
distribution of a benefit (e.g. salvage or damages under the Fatal
Accidents Act 1846, § 2), or liability (e.g. general average
contributions, or tithe rent-charge), or the incidence of a duty (e.g.
obligations as to the maintenance of highways). (2) In its strict legal
interpretation apportionment falls into two classes, "apportionment in
respect of estate" and "apportionment in respect of time."

1. _Apportionment in respect of Estate_ may result either from the act
of the parties or from the operation of law. Where a lessee is evicted
from, or surrenders or forfeits possession of part of the property
leased to him, he becomes liable at common law to pay only a rent
apportioned to the value of the interest which he still retains. So
where the person entitled to the reversion of an estate assigns part of
it, the right to an apportioned part of the rent incident to the whole
reversion passes to his assignee. The lessee is not bound, however, by
an apportionment of rent made upon the grant of part of the reversion
unless it is made either with his consent or by the verdict of a jury.
The assignee of the reversion of part of demised premises could not, at
common law, re-enter for breach of a condition, inasmuch as a condition
of re-entry in a lease could not at common law be apportioned. But this
has now been altered by statute both in England (Law of Property
Amendment Act 1859, § 3; Conveyancing Act 1881, § 12) and in many of the
British colonies (e.g. Ontario, Rev. Stats., 1897, c. 170, § 9;
Barbados, No. 12 of 1891, § 9). In the cases just mentioned there is
apportionment in respect of estate by act of the parties.

  _Apportionment by operation of law_ may be brought about where by act
  of law a lease becomes inoperative as regards its subject-matter, or
  by the "act of God" (as, for instance, where part of an estate is
  submerged by the encroachments of the sea). To the same category
  belongs the apportionment of rent which takes place under various
  statutes (e.g. the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act 1845, § 119, when
  land is required for public purposes; the Agricultural Holdings Act
  1883, § 41, in the case of a tenant from year to year receiving notice
  to quit part of a holding; and the Irish Land Act 1903, § 61,
  apportionment of quit and crown rents).

_2. Apportionment in respect of Time._--At common law, there was no
apportionment of rent in respect of time. Such apportionment was,
however, in ceftain cases allowed in England by the Distress for Rent
Act 1737, and the Apportionment Act 1834, and is now allowed generally
under the Apportionment Act 1870. Under that statute (§ 2) all rents,
annuities, dividends and other periodical payments in the nature of
income are to be considered as accruing from day to day and to be
apportionable in respect of time accordingly. It is provided, however,
that the apportioned part of such rents, &c., shall only be payable or
recoverable in the case of a continuing payment, when the entire portion
of which it forms part itself becomes payable, and, in the case of a
payment determined by re-entry, death or otherwise, only when the next
entire portion would have been payable if it had not so determined (§
3). Persons entitled to apportioned parts of rent have the same remedies
for recovering them when payable as they would have had in respect of
the entire rent; but a lessee is not to be liable for any apportioned
part specifically. The rent is recoverable by the heir or other person
who would, but for the apportionment, be entitled to the entire rent,
and he holds it subject to distribution (§ 4). The Apportionment Act
1870 extends to payments not made under any instrument in writing (§ 2),
but not to annual sums made payable in policies of insurance (§ 6).
Apportionment under the act can be excluded by express stipulation.

The apportionment created by this statute is "apportionment in respect
of time." The cases to which it applies are mainly cases of either (A)
apportionment of rent due under leases where at a time between the dates
fixed for payment the lessor or lessee dies, or some other alteration in
the position of parties occurs; or (B) apportionment of income between
the representatives of a limited owner and the remainder-man when the
limited interest determines at a time between the date when such income
became due.

  (A) With regard to the former of these classes, it may be noticed that
  although apportioned rent becomes payable only when the whole rent is
  due, the landlord, in the case of the bankruptcy of an ordinary
  tenant, may prove for a proportionate part of the rent up to the date
  of the receiving order (Bankruptcy Act 1883, Sched. ii. r. 19); and
  that a similar rule holds good in the winding up of a company (_in re
  South Kensington Co-operative Stores_, 1881, 17 Ch.D. 161); and
  further that the act of 1870 applies to the liability to pay, as well
  as to the right to receive, rent (_in re Wilson_, 1893, 62 L.J.Q.B.
  628, 632). Accordingly where an assignment of a lease is made between
  two half-yearly rent-days, the assignee is not liable to pay the full
  amount of the half-year's rent falling due on the rent-day next after
  the date of the assignment, but only an apportioned part of that
  half-year's rent, computed from the last mentioned date (_Glass_ v.
  _Patterson_, 1902, 2 Ir.R. 660).

  (B) With regard to the apportionment of income, the only points
  requiring notice here are that all dividends payable by public
  companies are apportionable, whether paid at fixed periods or not,
  unless the payment is, in effect, a payment of capital (§ 5).

The Apportionment Act 1870 extends to Scotland and Ireland. It has been
followed in many of the British colonies (e.g. Ontario, Rev. Stats.,
1897, c. 170, §§ 4-8; New Zealand, No. 4 of 1886; Tasmania, No. 8 of
1871; Barbados, No. 12 of 1891, §§ 9-12). Similar legislation has been
adopted in many of the states of the American Union, where, as in
England, rent was not, at common law, apportionable as to time (Kent,
_Comm_. iii. 469-472).

An _equitable apportionment_, apart from statute law, arises where
property is bequeathed on trust to pay the income to a tenant for life
and the reversion to others, and the realization of the property in the
form of a fund capable of producing income is postponed for the benefit
of the estate. In such cases there is an ultimate apportionment between
the persons entitled to the income and those entitled to the capital of
the accumulations for the period of such postponement. The rule followed
is this: the proceeds, when realized, are apportionable between capital
and income by ascertaining the sum which, put out and accumulated at 3%
_per annum_ from the day of the testator's death (with yearly rents and
deducting income tax) would have produced at the day of receipt the sum
actually received. The sum so ascertained should be treated as capital
and the residue as income. (_In re Earl of Chesterfield's Trusts_, 1883,
24 Ch.D. 643; _In re Goodenough_, 1895, 2 Ch. 537; _Rowlls_ v. _Bebb_,
1900, 2 Ch. 107.)

  In addition to the authorities cited in the text, see Stroud, _Jud.
  Dict._ (2nd ed., London, 1903), s.v. "Apportion"; Bouvier, _Law Dict._
  (London and Boston, 1897), s.v. "Apportionment"; _Ruling Cases_
  (London, 1895), tit. "Apportionment"; Fawcett, _Landlord and Tenant_
  (London, 1905), pp. 238 et seq.; Foa, _Landlord and Tenant_ (3rd ed.,
  London, 1901), pp. 112 et seq.     (A. W. R.)