APPRENTICESHIP (from Fr. _apprendre_, to learn), a contract whereby one
person, called the master, binds himself to teach, and another, called
the apprentice, undertakes to learn, some trade or profession, the
apprentice serving his master for a certain time.

Roman law is silent on the subject on this contract, nor does it seem to
have had any connexion with the division of the Roman citizens into
tribes or colleges. So far as can be seen it arose in the middle ages,
and formed an integral part of the system of trade gilds and
corporations by which skilled labourers of all kinds sought protection
against the feudal lords, and the maintenance of those exclusive
privileges with which in the interests of the public they were favoured.
In those times it was believed that neither arts nor sciences would
flourish unless such only were allowed to practise them as had given
proofs of reasonable proficiency and were formed into bodies corporate,
with certain powers of self-government and the exclusive monopoly of
their respective arts within certain localities; and the medieval
_universitas_ (corporation)--whether of smiths and tailors or of
scholars--included both such as were entitled to practise and teach and
such as were in course of learning. The former were the masters, the
latter the apprentices. Hence the term _apprentice_ was applied
indifferently to such as were being taught a trade or a learned
profession, and even to undergraduates or scholars who were qualifying
themselves for the degree of doctor or master in the liberal arts. When
barristers were first appointed by Edward I. of England they were styled
_apprenticii ad legem_--the serjeants-at-law being _servientes ad
legem_; and these two terms corresponded respectively to the trade names
of apprentices and journeymen. During the middle ages the term of
apprenticeship was seven years, and this period was thought no more than
sufficient to instruct the learner in his profession, craft or mystery
under a properly qualified master, teacher or doctor--for these names
were synonymous--and to reimburse the latter by service for the training
received. After this the apprentice became himself a master and a member
of the corporation, with full rights to practise the business and to
teach others in his turn; so also it would seem that undergraduates had
to pass through a curriculum of seven years before they could attain the
degree of doctor or master in the liberal arts. On the continent of
Europe these rules were observed with considerable rigour, both in the
learned professions and in those which we now designate as trades. In
England they made their way more slowly and did not receive much
countenance, there being always a jealousy of anything savouring of
interference with the freedom of trade. Nevertheless the formation of
gilds and companies of tradesmen in England dates probably from the 12th
century, and the institution of apprenticeships cannot be of much later
date. In 1388 and 1405 it is noticed in acts of parliament. By various
subsequent statutes provisions were made for the regulation of the
institution, and from them it appears that seven years was its ordinary
and normal term in the absence of special arrangement. By a statute of
1562 this was made the law of the land, and it was enacted that no
person should exercise any "trade or mystery" without having served a
seven years' apprenticeship. In no place did the apprentices become so
formidable by their numbers and organization as in London. During the
Great Rebellion they took an active part as a political body, and were
conspicuous after the Restoration by being frequently engaged in
tumults. It was probably owing to this circumstance, quite as much as to
economic considerations of freedom of trade, that the act of Elizabeth
never found much favour with the courts of law. Soon after the Great
Rebellion we find the apprentice laws strongly reprobated by the judges,
who endeavoured, on the theory that the act of Elizabeth could apply to
no trades which were not in existence at its date, to limit its
operation as far as possible. Such limitation of the act gave rise to
many absurd anomalies and inconsistencies, e.g. that a coachmaker could
not make his own wheels but must buy them of a wheelwright, while the
latter might make both wheels and coaches, because coach-making was not
a trade in England when the act of Elizabeth was passed. For the like
reason the great textile and metal manufactures which arose at
Manchester and Birmingham were held exempt from the operation of the
statute. Concurrently with the dislike to the apprentice laws which such
anomalies generated, the doctrines of Adam Smith, that all monopolies or
restrictions on the freedom of trade were injurious to the public
interest, had gradually been making their way, and notwithstanding much
opposition an act was passed in 1814 by which the statute of Elizabeth,
in so far as it enacts that no person shall engage in any trade without
a seven years' apprenticeship, was wholly repealed. The effect of this
act was to give every person the fullest right to exercise any
occupation or calling of a mechanical or trading kind for which he
deemed himself qualified.

Apprenticeship, therefore, which was formerly a compulsory, now became a
voluntary contract. In the case of the learned professions the
principles and theories which gave birth to corporations with
monopolies, and required apprenticeship or its equivalents,
have--contrary to what has taken place in trade--been not only
maintained but intensified; that is to say, not only have such bodies
retained and even extended in some cases their exclusive privileges, but
in general no one is allowed to practise in such professions unless his
capabilities have been tested and approved by public authority. Thus no
man is allowed to practise law or medicine in any of their branches who
has not undergone the appropriate training by attendance at a university
or by apprenticeship--sometimes by both combined--and passed certain
examinations. Entrance to the church is guarded by similar checks. In
such instances the old principle--now generally abandoned in trade--of
granting a monopoly to those possessing a certain standard of
qualification is maintained in greater vigour than ever.

In some kinds of manufacture the old conditions have been modified by
the subdivisions of labour or by the introduction of machinery, which
have reduced the amount of skill which formerly was requisite, and thus
they have passed out of the category of the higher skilled handicrafts,
as only a very slight or short training is necessary to make an
efficient worker; but a large number of the higher skilled trades remain
which require a long period of training at the bench, and a careful
inquiry into this subject has shown that in nearly all of such trades
there is a scarcity of skilled workers, which is due to the falling off
in the number of apprenticeships. Many persons qualified to form an
opinion deplore that something in the nature of the old standard of
qualification is not still applied to those trades, and consider that
the only method of restoring a high standard of skill is by
apprenticeship. The decay of apprenticeship in these trades is due, not
to any inherent defect in the system, nor to its having been superseded
by any other form of technical education, but to difficulties,
especially in London and some other large towns, which place it beyond
the reach of that class of persons who have the greatest need of it.
Among these difficulties are:--first, insufficient organization, and
secondly, want of funds to pay premiums where such are required. These
difficulties are accentuated in London and some other large towns, but
in many other districts apprenticeship is actively proceeded with.
Efforts are being made, notably by the National Institution of
Apprenticeship, to meet these difficulties. The Charity Commissioners in
their report for 1905 recognized the value of this institution, and
stated that they would in future enable the trustees of charity
endowments for apprenticeship to avail themselves of the practical
co-operation of the institution. The modern trade unions, on the other
hand, have done nothing to assist in restoring apprenticeship to its
proper place; on the contrary, they have hampered it by restrictions
which they have imposed, limiting the number of apprentices who may be
taken. The result of fewer apprentices has been not only to lower the
standard of skill in the higher trades, but to reduce the productive
capacity of the artisans. The altered conditions now attending
apprenticeship are, mainly, that the apprentice does not live with the
master, and that the term is generally five years instead of a longer
period; but the principle remains precisely the same, and the fact that
it is applied more and more largely in Austria, Germany and other
countries is an evidence of its necessity.

The contract of apprenticeship is generally created by indenture, but
any writing properly expressed and attested will do. The full
consideration must be set out, and the instrument, whether a premium is
paid or not, must be duly stamped, except in the case of parish
apprentices and apprentices to the sea service (see SEAMEN, LAWS
RELATING TO). Where a charity or institution intervenes, it retains
control over the indentures until the end of the term of apprenticeship,
when the indenture should be cancelled and given up to the apprentice.
Any one who is capable of making a contract can take an apprentice, and
the law does not limit the number which may be taken by any master. Any
person of legal capacity can bind himself as an apprentice, provided he
is over seven years of age, though, as he is by the common law exempt
from all liability _ex contractu_, it is usual for the apprentice's
relations or friends to become bound for his service and good conduct
during the period of his apprenticeship. The consent of the apprentice,
however, must be expressed by his executing the indenture. No child
under nine can be bound as a parish apprentice. The master must teach
the apprentice the agreed trade or trades; should the master exercise
two trades (which he has agreed to teach) and give up one, it would be
good ground for dissolving the contract by the apprentice. An apprentice
is not bound to work on Sundays, but he may be required to work on bank
holidays. He cannot become a volunteer (soldier) without his master's
consent. It is usual in the indenture to state whether the apprentice is
to be paid wages or otherwise. If the contract is to pay wages, no
deduction can be made owing to illness or accident, unless it has been
so provided for in the indentures. Nor is the apprentice liable for
breakages or similar faults. The master has been supposed to have a
right to administer moderate corporal punishment, though he may not
delegate it. But this right is really obsolete. According to old custom
a master provided proper food for his apprentices, and medical
attendance when required; but the modern practice is for apprentices to
reside with their parents or friends who maintain them. A master cannot
assign indentures without the approval of the apprentice or such parties
as are named in the contract for this purpose, even if he should
transfer his business. The contract of apprenticeship may be dissolved
by (1) efflux of time; (2) by death (if the master dies, some part of
the premium is usually returnable, but if the apprentice dies no part is
returnable); (3) by consent; (4) in case of grave misconduct; (5) under
the Bankruptcy Act 1883, providing for discharge of the indentures of
apprenticeship and for payment on account of premium. Disputes between
master and apprentice, in cases where no premium has been paid, or where
the premium does not exceed £25, are dealt with by courts of summary
jurisdiction. Apprentices bound according to the "custom of London," who
are infants above the age of fourteen years and under twenty-one and
unmarried, are responsible upon covenants contained in indentures
executed by them just as if they were of full age. The term of
apprenticeship is usually not less than four years. Apprentices by the
custom of London in agreements made at the Guildhall are subject to the
jurisdiction of the chamberlain of London.

Parish apprentices are those bound out by guardians of the poor in
England. By the Poor Relief Act 1601, overseers of the poor were
empowered, with the consent of two justices, to put out poor children as
apprentices "where they shall be convenient." Owing to the
disinclination to receive such apprentices it became necessary to make
the reception compulsory (1696), but this compulsion to receive them was
abolished in 1844. Many statutes have been passed from time to time
regulating the apprenticing of parish children, but it is now under the
control of the Local Government Board, which issues rules specifying
fully the manner in which such children are to be bound, assigned and
maintained.

  AUTHORITIES.--See E. Austin, _Law Relating to Apprentices_ (1890);
  Addison, _On Contracts_ (1905). For the state of apprenticeship in
  European countries, and, more particularly in France, see
  _Apprentissage, enquête et documents_ (Paris, 1904, Conseil Supérieur
  du Travail, Ministère du Commerce, de l'Industrie, des Postes et des
  Télégraphes, session de 1902). See also the literature issued by the
  National Institution of Apprenticeship, London.     (J. S. B.)