APPREHENSION (Lat. _ad_, to; _prehendere_, to seize), in psychology, a
term applied to a mode of consciousness in which nothing is affirmed or
denied of the object in question, but the mind is merely aware of
("seizes") it. "Judgment" (says Reid, ed. Hamilton, i. p. 414) "is an
act of the mind specifically different from simple apprehension or the
bare conception of a thing"; and again, "Simple apprehension or
conception can neither be true nor false." This distinction provides for
the large class of mental acts in which we are simply aware of or "take
in" a number of familiar objects, about which we in general make no
judgment unless our attention is suddenly called by a new feature. Or
again two alternatives may be apprehended without any resultant judgment
as to their respective merits. Similarly G.F. Stout points out that
while we have a very vivid idea of a character or an incident in a work
of fiction, we can hardly be said in any real sense to have any belief
or to make any judgment as to its existence or truth. With this mental
state may be compared the purely aesthetic contemplation of music,
wherein apart from, say, a false note, the faculty of judgment is for
the time inoperative. To these examples may be added the fact that one
can fully understand an argument in all its bearings without in any way
judging its validity.

Without going into the question fully, it may be pointed out that the
distinction between judgment and apprehension is relative. In every kind
of thought there is judgment of some sort in a greater or less degree of
prominence. Judgment and thought are in fact psychologically
distinguishable merely as different, though correlative, activities of
consciousness. Professor Stout further investigates the phenomena of
apprehension, and comes to the conclusion that "it is possible to
distinguish and identify a whole without apprehending any of its
constituent details." On the other hand, if the attention focuses
itself for a time on the apprehended object, there is an expectation
that such details will as it were emerge into consciousness. Hence he
describes such apprehension as "implicit," and in so far as the implicit
apprehension determines the order of such emergence he describes it as
"schematic." A good example of this process is the use of formulae in
calculations; ordinarily the formula is used without question; if
attention is fixed upon it, the steps by which it is shown to be
universally applicable emerge and the "schema" is complete in detail.

With this result may be compared Kant's theory of apprehension as a
synthetic act (the "synthesis of apprehension") by which the sensory
elements of a perception are subjected to the formal conditions of time
and space.

  See G.F. Stout, _Analytic Psychology_ (London, 1896); F. Brentano,
  _Psychologie_ (bk. ii. ch. vii.), and _Vom Ursprung sittlicher
  Erkenntnis_; B. Titchener, _Outlines of Psychology_ (New York, 1902),
  and text-books of psychology. Also PSYCHOLOGY.