APPROPRIATION (from Lat. _appropriare_, to set aside), the act of
setting apart and applying to a particular use to the exclusion of all
other. In ecclesiastical law, appropriation is the perpetual annexation
of an ecclesiastical benefice to the use of some spiritual corporation,
either aggregate or sole. In the middle ages in England the custom grew
up of the monasteries reserving to their own use the greater part of the
tithes of their appropriated benefices, leaving only a small portion to
their vicars in the parishes. On the dissolution of the monasteries
these "great tithes" were often granted, with the monastic lands, to
laymen, whose successors, known as "lay impropriators" or "lay rectors,"
still hold them, the system being known as _impropriation_.
Appropriation may be severed and the church become disappropriate, by
the presentation of a clerk, properly instituted and inducted, or by the
dissolution of the corporation possessing the benefice.

In the law of debtor and creditor, appropriation of payments is the
application of a particular payment for the purpose of paying a
particular debt. When a creditor has two debts due to him from the same
debtor on distinct accounts, the general law as to the appropriation of
payments made by the debtor is that the debtor is entitled to apply the
payments to such account as he thinks fit; _solvitur in modum
solventis_. In default of appropriation by the debtor the creditor is
entitled to determine the application of the sums paid, and may
appropriate them even to the discharge of debts barred by the Statute of
Limitations. In default of appropriation by either debtor or creditor,
the law implies an appropriation of the earlier payments to the earlier
debts.

In constitutional law, appropriation is the assignment of money for a
special purpose. In the United Kingdom an Appropriation Bill is a bill
passed at the end of each session of parliament, enumerating the money
grants made during the session, and appropriating the various sums, as
voted by committee of supply, to the various purposes for which it is to
be applied. The United States constitution (art. I. § 9) says: "No money
shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations
made by law." Bills for appropriating money originate in the House of
Representatives, but may be amended in the Senate.