APRAKSIN, THEDOR MATVYEEVICH (1671-1728), Russian soldier, began life as
one of the pages of Tsar Theodore III., after whose death he served the
little tsar Peter in the same capacity. The playfellowship of the two
lads resulted in a lifelong friendship. In his twenty-first year
Apraksin was appointed governor of Archangel, then the most important
commercially of all the Russian provinces, and built ships capable of
weathering storms, to the great delight of the tsar. He won his
colonelcy at the siege of Azov (1696). In 1700 he was appointed chief of
the admiralty, in which post (from 1700 to 1706) his unusual technical
ability was of great service. While Peter was combating Charles XII.,
Apraksin was constructing fleets, building fortresses and havens
(Taganrog). In 1707 he was transferred to Moscow. In 1708 he was
appointed commander-in-chief in Ingria, to defend the new capital
against the Swedes, whom he utterly routed, besides capturing Viborg in
Carelia. He held the chief command in the Black Sea during the campaign
of the Pruth (1711), and in 1713 materially assisted the conquest of
Finland by his operations from the side of the sea. In 1710-1720 he
personally conducted the descents upon Sweden, ravaging that country
mercilessly, and thus extorting the peace of Nystad, whereby she
surrendered the best part of her Baltic provinces to Russia. For these
great services he was made a senator and admiral-general of the empire.
His last expedition was to Reval in 1726, to cover the town from an
anticipated attack by the English government, with whom the relations of
Russia at the beginning of the reign of Catharine I. were strained
almost to breaking-point. Though frequently threatened with terrible
penalties by Peter the Great for his incurable vice of peculation,
Apraksin, nevertheless, contrived to save his head, though not his
pocket, chiefly through the mediation of the good-natured empress,
Catharine, who remained his friend to the last, and whom he assisted to
place on the throne on the death of Peter. Apraksin was the most genial
and kind-hearted of all Peter's pupils. He is said to have never made an
enemy. He died on the 10th of November 1728.

  See R. Nisbet Bain, _The Pupils of Peter the Great_ (London, 1897).
       (R. N. B.)