APRICOT (from the Lat. _praecox_, or _praecoquus_, ripened early,
_coquere_, to cook, or ripen; the English form, formerly "apricock" and
"abrecox," comes through the Fr. _abricot_, from the Span.
_albaricoque_, which was an adaptation of the Arabic _al-burquk_, itself
a rendering of the late Gr. [Greek: prekokkia] or [Greek: praikokion],
adapted from the Latin; the derivation from _in aprico cactus_ is a mere
guess), the fruit of _Prunus armeniaca_, also called _Armeniaca
vulgaris_. Under the former name it is regarded as a species of the
genus to which the plums belong, the latter establishes it as a distinct
genus of the natural order _Rosaceae_. The apricot is, like the plum, a
stone fruit, cultivated generally throughout temperate regions, and used
chiefly in the form of preserves and in tarts. The tree has long been
cultivated in _Armenia_ (hence the name _Armeniaca_); it is a native of
north China and other parts of temperate Asia. It flowers very early in
the season, and is a hardy tree, but the fruit will scarcely ripen in
Britain unless the tree is trained against a wall. A great number of
varieties of the apricot, as of most cultivated fruits, are
distinguished by cultivators. The kernels of several varieties are
edible, and in Egypt those of the Musch-Musch variety form a
considerable article of commerce. The French liqueur _Eau de noyaux_ is
prepared from bitter apricot kernels. Large quantities of fruit are
imported from France into the United Kingdom.

The apricot is propagated by budding on the mussel or common plum stock.
The tree succeeds in good well-drained loamy soil, rather light than
heavy. It is usually grown as a wall tree, the east and west aspects
being preferred to the south, which induces mealiness in the fruit,
though in Scotland the best aspects are necessary. The most usual and
best mode of training is the fan method. The fruit is produced on shoots
of the preceding year, and on small close spurs formed on the
two-year-old wood. The trees should be planted about 20 ft. apart. The
summer pruning should begin early in June, at which period all the
irregular foreright and useless shoots are pinched off; and, shortly
afterwards, those which remain are fastened to the wall. At the winter
pruning all branches not duly furnished with spurs and fruit buds are
removed. The young bearing shoots are moderately pruned at the points,
care being, however, taken to leave a terminal shoot or leader to each
branch. The most common error in the pruning of apricots is laying in
the bearing shoots too thickly; the branches naturally diverge in fan
training, and when they extend so as to be about 15 in. apart, a fresh
branch should be laid in, to be again subdivided as required. The
blossoms of the apricot open early in spring, but are more hardy than
those of the peach; the same means of protection when necessary may be
employed for both. If the fruit sets too numerously, it is thinned out
in June and in the beginning of July, the later thinnings being used for
tarts. In the south of England, where the soil is suitable, the hardier
sorts of apricot, as the Breda and Brussels, bear well as standard trees
in favourable seasons. In such cases the trees may be planted from 20 to
25 ft. apart.

The ripening of the fruit of the apricot is accelerated by culture under
glass, the trees being either planted out like peaches or grown in pots
on the orchard-house system. They must be very gently excited, since
they naturally bloom when the spring temperature is comparatively low.
At first a maximum of 40° only must be permitted; after two or three
weeks it may be raised to 45°, and later on to 50° and 55°, and thus
continued till the trees are in flower, air being freely admitted, and
the minimum or night temperature ranging from 40° to 45°. After the
fruit is set the temperature should be gradually raised, being kept
higher in clear weather than in dull. When the fruit has stoned, the
temperature may be raised to 60° or 65° by day and 60° by night; and for
ripening off it may be allowed to reach 70° or 80° by sun heat.

The Moorpark is one of the best and most useful sorts in cultivation,
and should be planted for all general purposes; the Peach is a very
similar variety, not quite identical; and the Hemskerk is also similar,
but hardier. The Large Early, which ripens in the end of July and
beginning of August, and the Kaisha, a sweet-kernelled variety, which
ripens in the middle of August, are also to be recommended. For standard
trees in favourable localities the Breda and Brussels may be added.