APSE (Gr. [Greek: apsis], a fastening, especially the felloe of a wheel;
Lat. _absis_), in architecture, a semicircular recess covered with a
hemispherical vault. The term is applied also to the termination to the
choir, transept or aisle of any church which is either semicircular or
polygonal in plan, whether vaulted or covered with a timber roof; a
church is said to be "apsidal" when it terminates in an apse.

The earliest example of an apse is found in the temple of Mars Ultor at
Rome (2 B.C.), and it formed afterwards the favourite feature
terminating the rear of any temple, and one which gave importance to the
statue of the deity to whom the temple was dedicated. Its use by the
Romans was not confined to the temples, as it is found in the palaces on
the Palatine Hill, the great Thermae (Baths) and other monuments. In the
civil basilicas the apse was screened off by columns, and constituted
the court of justice. In the Ulpian (Trajan's) Basilica the apses at
each end were of such great dimensions as to come better under the
definition of hemicycles (q.v.). In these apses the floor was raised,
and had an altar placed in the centre of its chord, where sacrifices
were made prior to the sittings. The only other two Roman basilicas in
which the semicircular apse can still be traced are that commenced by
Maxentius and completed by Constantine at Rome and the basilica at Trier
(Trèves).

In the earliest Christian basilica, St Peter's at Rome, built 330 A.D.,
the apse, 57 ft. in diameter, raised above the confessio or crypt, was
placed at the west end of the church. This orientation was originally
followed in the churches of St Paul and St Lawrence (S. Lorenzo fuori le
Mura), both outside the walls of Rome, and is found in most of the
churches at Rome. On the other hand, in the Byzantine church, the apse
was built at the east end of the church.

During the reign of Justin the Second (A.D. 565-574), owing to a change
in the liturgy, two more apses were added, one on each side of the
central apse. These in the Greek Church were provided not to hold altars
but for ceremonial purposes. One of the earliest examples is found in
the church of St Nicholas at Myra of the 6th century, and the basilica
erected in the great court of the temple at Baalbek shows the triple
apse. The earliest example in Rome is found in the church of Sta Maria
in Cosmedin (772-795), built probably by Greek craftsmen, who had been
exiled by the Iconoclasts. Other triapsal choirs are found in the
cathedral of Parenzo (542 A.D.), in St Mark's, Venice, in Sta Fosca and
the Duomo at Torcello, and in numerous examples throughout Italy and
Germany. In central Syria there is one example only, at Kalat Seman,
where the side apses were a later addition.

There is one important distinction to be drawn between the Byzantine and
the Latin apses; they are both semicircular internally, but externally
the former are nearly always polygonal. It follows, therefore, that in
those churches in Italy where the apse is polygonal externally, it is a
sign of direct Byzantine influence. This is found in St Mark's, Venice;
Sta Fosca, Torcello; Murano; nearly all the churches at Ravenna; and in
the Crusaders' churches throughout Syria.

In the Coptic church in Egypt we find other characteristics; in the
churches of the Red and White Monasteries, attributed to St Helena, an
unusual depth is given to the apse, in the walls of which niches are
sunk; in the church of St John at Antinoë there are no fewer than seven.
Similar niches are found in the apses of St Mark's, Venice, built in
A.D. 828, it is said in imitation of St Mark's in Alexandria, to receive
the relics of St Mark brought over from there.

[Illustration: Apse of the White Monastery.]

In a large number of the apses in the Coptic churches the seats round
the apse with the bishop's throne in the centre are still preserved; of
these the best examples are at Abu Sargah, Al 'Adra and Abu-s-Sifain.
Unfortunately there are no remains of the fittings in the tribunes of
the ancient Roman basilicas, but those in St Peter's at Rome, which were
probably copied from them, are recorded in drawings, there being two or
three rows of stone seats with the papal throne in the centre. It is
possible also that some may still exist in the other early Christian
basilicas at Rome, but there have been so many changes that it is not
possible to trace them. In the cathedral of Parenzo in Istria (A.D.
532-535), the hemicycle of marble seats for the clergy with the
episcopal chair in the centre still exists. A similar arrangement is
found in the apse of the church of the 6th century attached to the
church of St Helena in the island of Paros, where there are eight steep
grades of semicircular stone seats with the bishop's chair in the
centre. The aspect of the interior of this apse has in consequence very
much the appearance of a Roman theatre. A third example, better known,
exists at Torcello, with six concentric seats rising one above the
other, and in the centre the episcopal chair with a flight of thirteen
steps down in front of it.

In the basilica at Bethlehem, the east end of which was reconstructed
probably in the 5th century, apses of similar dimensions to the eastern
apse were built at the north and south end of the transept. The same
disposition is found in the Coptic churches of the Red and White
Monasteries just referred to, in the church of St Elias at Salonica (c.
1012), the cathedral of Echmiadzin in Armenia, at Vatopedi, Mt. Athos,
and some other Byzantine churches. An early example in France exists in
the church of Germigny-des-Prés on the Loire (806; rebuilt 1868), where
the three apses are horseshoe on plan, and the same is found in the
church at Oberzell in the island of Reichenau, Lake of Constance, except
that the eastern apse there is square. Small examples also are found at
Querqueville and at St Wandrille near Caudebec, both in Normandy, but
the finest development takes place in the church of St Maria im Capitol
at Cologne, where the aisles are carried round both the northern and
southern apses. The same feature exists in the cathedral of Tournai in
Belgium and the churches at Cambrai, Soissons and Valenciennes (the last
destroyed at the Revolution) in France, and also in the cathedrals of
Como and of Pisa in Italy. Without aisles, there are examples in the
churches of the Apostles and of St Martin at Cologne; St Quirinus at
Neuss; at Roermond; St Cross, Breslau; the cathedral of Bonn; and, at a
later date, in the Marienkirche at Trier; S. Elizabeth at Marburg; the
church of Sta Maria-del-Fiore at Florence; and the cathedral of Parma.

In consequence of a change made in the orientation of apses in the 6th
or 7th century, others were subsequently added at the west end of
existing churches, and this is considered to have been the case at
Canterbury; but in the German churches sometimes apses were built from
the first at both ends, such as are shown on the manuscript plan of St
Gall, of the 9th century. Western apses exist at Gernrode; Drübeck;
Huyseburg; the Obermünster of Regensburg; St Godehard in Hildesheim; the
cathedrals of Worms and Trier; the Abbey church of Laach; the Minster at
Bonn; and in St Pietro-in-Grado near Pisa.

The triapsal churches, to which we have referred, are those in which the
side apses form the termination of the side aisles; but where there are
transepts, the aisles are sometimes not continued beyond them, and the
expansion of the transept to north and south gives more ample space for
apses; of these there are many examples, as in the Abbey church of Laach
in Germany; at Romsey; Christchurch, Hants; Gloucester, Ely, Norwich and
Canterbury cathedrals, in England; and at St Georges de Boscherville in
France; sometimes there being space for two apses on each side.

In the beginning of the 13th century in France, the apses became
radiating chapels outside the choir aisle, henceforth known as the
chevet. These radiating chapels would seem to have been suggested in
Norwich and Canterbury cathedrals, but the feature is essentially a
French one and in England is found only in Westminster Abbey, into which
it was introduced by Henry III., to whom the chevets of Amiens, Beauvais
and Reims were probably well known.     (R. P. S.)