APTERA (Greek for "wingless"), a term in zoological classification
applied by Linnaeus to various groups of wingless arthropods, including
some of the insects, the centipedes, the millipedes, the Arachnida
(scorpions, spiders, &c.) and the Crustacea. In modern zoology the term
has become restricted to the lowest order of the class Hexapoda or true
insects. This order includes the bristle-tails and the springtails.

[Illustration: From _Knowledge_

FIG. 1.--A typical Thysanuran (_Machilus maritima_). Female, ventral
view.

  ii.-x., Appendages on 2nd to 10th abdominal segments. The eversible
    sacs on the abdominal segments are shown, some protruded and some
    retracted.
  Ovp, Ovipositor.
  Mn, Mandible, and Mxl, maxillula, dissected out of head.]

Many wingless insects--such as lice, fleas and certain earwigs and
cockroaches--are placed in various orders together with winged insects
to which they show evident relationships. In such cases the absence of
wings must be regarded as secondary--due to a parasitic or other special
manner of life. But the bristle-tails and springtails, which form the
modern order Aptera, are all without any trace of wings, and, on account
of several remarkable archaic characters which they exhibit, there is
reason for believing that they are primitively wingless--that they
represent an early offshoot which sprang from the ancestral stock of the
Hexapoda before organs of flight had been acquired by the class.

_Characters._--In addition to the complete absence of wings and of
metamorphosis, the Aptera are characterized by peculiar elongate
mandibles (figs. 1, Mn.; 2, 4), with toothed apex and sub-apical
grinding surface, like those of certain Crustacea; by the presence
between the mandibles and maxillae of a pair of appendages (superlinguae
or maxillulae), fig. 1, Mxl., which are absent or vestigial in all other
insects; and, in most genera, by the presence in the adult of abdominal
appendages used for locomotion, these latter varying in number from one
to nine pairs. Among peculiarities of the internal organs the segmental
arrangement of the ovaries in most members of the order is noteworthy.
Many Aptera are covered with flattened scales like those of moths.

_Classification._--The Aptera are divided into two divergent sub-orders,
the _Thysanura_ (q.v.) or bristle-tails, and the _Collembola_ or
springtails.

_Thysanura._--The bristle-tails have an abdomen of eleven segments, the
tenth usually carrying a pair of long many-jointed tail-feelers (cerci,
fig. 1, x.); sometimes a median, jointed tail-appendage is also present.
To these feelers the popular name is due. There may also be abdominal
appendages--in the form of simple unjointed stylets (fig. 1, ii.-ix.),
accompanied by paired eversible sacs, probably respiratory in
function--on eight (or fewer) other abdominal segments. The head of a
bristle-tail carries a pair of compound eyes and a pair of elongate
many-jointed feelers.

The air-tube system is developed in varying degree in different
bristle-tails, the number of pairs of spiracles being three
(_Campodea_), nine (_Machilis_), ten (_Lepisma_), or eleven (_Japyx_).

Four families of Thysanura are usually recognized. In the _Machilidae_
and _Lepismidae_ (these two families are known as the Ectotrophi) the
maxillae are like those of typical biting insects, and there is a median
tail-bristle in addition to the paired cerci; while in the _Campodeidae_
and _Japygidae_ (which form the group Entotrophi) the jaws are
apparently sunk in the head, through a deep inpushing at the mouth, and
there is no median tail-bristle. The cerci in _Japyx_ are not, as usual,
jointed feelers, but strong, curved appendages forming a forceps as in
earwigs.

[Illustration: From Carpenter, _Proc. R. Dub. Soc._, vol. xi.

FIG. 2.--Structure of Collembola.

  1. _Isotoma hibernica_. Side view.
  2.        "             Ocelli and post-antennal organ of right side.
  3.        "             Tip of terminal antennal segment with antennal
                            organ.
  4.        "             Mandible.
  5.        "             Tip of left dens with mucro. Outer view.
  6.        "             Hind-foot with claws. × 240.
  7. _Entomobrya anomala_. Catch.]

_Collembola._--In springtails, or _Collembola_, the jaws are sunk into
the head, as in the entotrophous Thysanura; the head carries a pair of
feelers with not more than six (usually four) segments, and there are
eight (or fewer) distinct simple eyes on each side of the head (fig. 2,
1, 2). These are in some genera like the single elements (_ommatidia_)
of a compound insect eye, in others like simple ocelli. The abdomen
consists of six segments only. The first of these usually carries a
ventral tube, furnished with paired eversible sacs which assist the
insects in walking on smooth surfaces, and perhaps serve also as organs
for breathing. From the researches of V. Willem it appears that the
viscid fluid which causes the adherence of the ventral tube is secreted
by a pair of glands in the head whose ducts open into a superficial
groove leading from the second maxillae backward to the tube on the
first abdominal segment. The third abdominal segment usually carries a
pair of short appendages whose basal segments are fused together; this
is the "catch" (fig. 2, 7), whose function is to hold in place the
"spring," which is formed by the fourth pair of abdominal
appendages--also with fused basal segments. In most Collembola the
spring appears to belong to the fifth abdominal somite, but Willem, by
study of the muscles, has shown that it really belongs to the fourth.
The fused basal segments of the appendages form the "manubrium" of the
spring, which carries the two "dentes" (usually elongate and flexible),
each with a "mucro" at its tip (fig. 2, 5). The fifth abdominal segment
is the genital, and the sixth the anal somite.

The spring serves the Collembola which possess it as an efficient
leaping-organ (see SPRINGTAIL). But in some genera it is greatly reduced
and in many quite vestigial.

Most springtails are without air-tubes, and breathe through the general
cuticle of the body. But in one family (_Sminthuridae_) a spiracle,
opening on either side between the head and the prothorax, leads to a
branching system of air-tubes. The _Sminthuridae_ are further
characterized by the globular abdomen, which shows but little external
trace of segmentation, and by the well-developed spring.

In the _Entomobryidae_ the body is elongate and clearly segmented, but
the dorsal region (tergum) of the prothorax is much reduced and the head
downwardly directed; the spring is well developed. In the _Achorutidae_
the head is forwardly directed, the tergum of the prothorax conspicuous,
and the spring small or vestigial.

In many genera of springtails a curious post-antennal organ, consisting
of sensory structures (often complex in form) surrounded by a firm ring,
is to be noticed on the cuticle of the head between the eyes and the
feelers. It may be of use as an organ of smell. Other sensory organs
occur on the third and fourth antennal segments in the _Achorutidae_ and
_Entomobryidae_ (fig. 2, 3).

_Distribution and Habits._--The Aptera are probably the most widely
distributed of all insects. Among the bristle-tails we find the genus
_Machilis_, represented in Europe (including the Faeroe Islands) and in
Chile; while _Campodea_ lives high on the mountains and in the deepest
caves. The springtails have even a wider distribution. The genus
_Isotoma_, for example, has some of its numerous species in regions so
remote as Alaska, Franz Josef Land, the Sandwich Islands, the South
Orkneys, Graham Land, Kerguelen and South Victoria Land. As it is
unlikely that these delicate insects could be transported across
sea-channels, their wide and discontinuous range suggests both their
great antiquity and the former existence of continental tracts over
which they may have travelled to their present stations.

Springtails and bristle-tails live in damp concealed places--under
stones or tree-bark, in moss, and in the decaying vegetable or animal
matter which serves as food for most of them. Some species, however, eat
fresh plant-tissues. A species of bristle-tail (_Machilis maritima_) and
quite a number of springtails haunt the sea-coast at or below high-water
mark. In such localities many thousands of individuals may sometimes be
found associated together. The insect fauna of limestone caves both in
Europe and North America is largely composed of Aptera, especially
Collembola.

_Geological History._--A supposed Thysanuran from the Silurian of New
Brunswick has been described by G.F. Matthew, and another genus from the
French Carboniferous by C. Brongniart. Not till the Tertiary do we find
remains of Aptera in any quantity, species both of living and extinct
genera being represented in the amber.

_Development._--The embryonic development of several genera of Aptera,
which has been carefully studied, will be more suitably described in
comparison with that of other insects than here (see HEXAPODA).

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The modern study of the Aptera may be said to date from
  the classical memoirs of T. Tullberg, "Sveriges Podurider," in _Kongl.
  Svensk Vetensk. Akad. Handl._ x., 1872, and Sir J. Lubbock (Lord
  Avebury), "Monograph of the Collembola and Thysanura," _Ray Society_,
  1873. In these, full references to the older literature will be found.
  Subsequently our knowledge of the Thysanura has been markedly advanced
  by J.T. Oudemans, _Bijdrage tot de Kennis den Thysanura en Collembola_
  (Amsterdam, 1888); B. Grassi, who published between 1885 and 1889 a
  series of memoirs entitled "I progenitori dei Miriapodi e degli
  Insetti," in the _Atti Accad. di Scienz. Nat. Catania_, and the
  _Memor. R. Accad. dei Lincei_; and V. Willem, whose "Recherches sur
  les Collemboles et les Thysanoures," in _Mem. Cour. Acad. Roy.
  Belgique_, lviii., 1900, are indispensable to the student. In addition
  to this work of Willem, valuable anatomical papers on Collembola have
  been published by H.J. Hansen (_Zool. Anz._ xvi., 1893), J.W. Folsom
  (_Bull. Mus. Comp. Anat. Harv._ xxxv., 1899), C. Börner (_Zool. Anz._
  xxiii., 1900), and K. Absolon (_Zool. Anz._ xxiii. and xxiv., 1900,
  1901), the two latter writers having paid especial attention to the
  peculiar post-antennal and antennal sense-organs of springtails.
  Absolon has also written on the Collembola of caves. These writers,
  with H. Schött, C. Schäffer and others, have published many systematic
  papers on Collembola, as has F. Silvestri on Thysanura. British
  species are mentioned in Lubbock's monograph; for recent additions see
  G.H. Carpenter and W. Evans (_Proc. R. Phys. Soc. Edinb._ xiv., 1899,
  and xv., 1903).     (G. H. C.)