APULEIUS, LUCIUS, Platonic philosopher and rhetorician, was born at
Madaura in Numidia about A.D. 125. As the son of one of the principal
officials, he received an excellent education, first at Carthage and
subsequently at Athens. After leaving Athens he undertook a long course
of travel, especially in the East, principally with the view of
obtaining initiation into religious mysteries. Having practised for some
time as an advocate at Rome, he returned to Africa. On a journey to
Alexandria he fell sick at Oea (Tripoli), where he made the acquaintance
of a rich widow, Aemilia Pudentilla, whom he subsequently married. The
members of her family disapproved of the marriage, and indicted Apuleius
on a charge of having gained her affections by magical arts. He easily
established his innocence, and his spirited, highly entertaining, but
inordinately long defence (_Apologia_ or _De Magia_) before the
proconsul Claudius Maximus is our principal authority for his biography.
From allusions in his subsequent writings, and the mention of him by St.
Augustine, we gather that the remainder of his prosperous life was
devoted to literature and philosophy. At Carthage he was elected
provincial priest of the imperial cult, in which capacity he occupied a
prominent position in the provincial council, had the duty of collecting
and managing the funds for the temples of the cult, and the
superintendence of the games in the amphitheatre. He lectured on
philosophy and rhetoric, like the Greek sophists, apparently with
success, since statues were erected in his honour at Carthage and
elsewhere. The year of his death is not known.

The work on which the fame of Apuleius principally rests has little
claim to originality. The _Metamorphoses_ or _Golden Ass_ (the latter
title seems not to be the author's own, but to have been bestowed in
compliment, just as the _Libri Rerum Quotidianarum_ of Gaius were called
_Aurei_) was founded on a narrative in the _Metamorphoses_ of Lucius of
Patrae, a work extant in the time of Photius. From Photius's account
(impugned, however, by Wieland and Courier), this book would seem to
have consisted of a collection of marvellous stories, related in an
inartistic fashion, and in perfect good faith. The literary capabilities
of this particular narrative attracted the attention of Apuleius's
contemporary, Lucian, who proceeded to work it up in his own manner,
adhering, as Photius seems to indicate, very closely to the original,
but giving it a comic and satiric turn. Apuleius followed this
rifacimento, making it, however, the groundwork of an elaborate romance,
interspersed with numerous episodes, of which the beautiful story of
Cupid and Psyche is the most celebrated, and altering the _dénouement_
to suit the religious revival of which he was an apostle.

The adventures of the youthful hero in the form of an ass are much the
same in both romances, but in Apuleius he is restored to human shape by
the aid of Isis, into whose mysteries he is initiated, and finally
becomes her priestess. The book is a remarkable illustration of the
contemporary reaction against a period of scepticism, of the general
appetite for miracle and magic, and of the influx of oriental and
Egyptian ideas into the old theology. It is also composed with a
well-marked literary aim, defined by Kretzschmann as the emulation of
the Greek sophists, and the transplantation of their _tours de force_
into the Latin language. Nothing, indeed, is more characteristic of
Apuleius than his versatility, unless it be his ostentation and
self-confidence in the display of it. The dignified, the ludicrous, the
voluptuous, the horrible, succeed each other with bewildering rapidity;
fancy and feeling are everywhere apparent, but not less so affectation,
meretricious ornament, and that effort to say everything finely which
prevents anything being said well. The Latinity has a strong African
colouring, and is crammed with obsolete words, agreeably to the taste of
the time. When these defects are mitigated or overlooked, the _Golden
Ass_ will be pronounced a most successful work, invaluable as an
illustration of ancient manners, and full of entertainment from
beginning to end. The most famous and poetically beautiful portion is
the episode of Cupid and Psyche, adapted from a popular legend of which
traces are found in most fairy mythologies, which explains the seeming
incongruity of its being placed in the mouth of an old hag. The
allegorical purport he has infused into it is his own, and entirely in
the spirit of the Platonic philosophy. Don Quixote's adventure with the
wine-skins, and Gil Blas's captivity among the robbers, are palpably
borrowed from Apuleius; and several of the humorous episodes, probably
current as popular stories long before his time, reappear in Boccaccio.

Of Apuleius's other writings, the _Apology_ has been already mentioned.
The _Florida_ (probably meaning simply "anthology," without any
reference to style) consists of a collection of excerpts from his
declamations, ingenious but highly affected, and in general perfect
examples of the sophistical art of saying nothing with emphasis. They
deal with the most varied subjects, and are intended to exemplify the
author's versatility. The pleasing little tract _On the God of Socrates_
expounds the Platonic doctrine of beneficent daemons, an intermediate
class between gods and men. Two books on Plato (_De Platone et Ejus
Dogmate_) treat of his life, and his physical and ethical philosophy; a
third, treating of logic, is generally considered spurious. The _De
Mundo_ is an adaptation of the [Greek: Peri kosmou] wrongly attributed
to Aristotle. Apuleius informs us that he had also composed numerous
poems in almost all possible styles, and several works on natural
history, some in Greek. In the preparation of these he seems to have
attended more closely to actual anatomical research than was customary
with ancient naturalists. Some other works--dealing with theology, the
properties of herbs, medical remedies and physiognomy, are wrongly
attributed to him.

The character of Apuleius, as delineated by himself, is attractive; he
appears vehement and passionate, but devoid of rancour; enterprising,
munificent, genial and an enthusiast for the beautiful and good. His
vanity and love of display are conspicuous, but are extenuated by a
genuine thirst for knowledge and a surprising versatility of
attainments. He prided himself on his proficiency in both Greek and
Latin. His place in letters is accidentally more important than his
genius strictly entitles him to hold. He is the only extant example in
Latin literature of an accomplished sophist in the good sense of the
term. The loss of other ancient romances has secured him a peculiar
influence on modern fiction; while his chronological position in a
transitional period renders him at once the evening star of the
Platonic, and the morning star of the Neo-Platonic philosophy.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Complete works: Editio princeps, ed. Andreas (1469);
  Oudendorp (1786-1823); Hildebrand (1842); Helm (1905 et seq.); P.
  Thomas (vol. iii. 1908). _Metamorphoses_, Eyssenhardt (1869), van der
  Vliet (1897). _Psyche et Cupido_, Jahn-Michaelis (1883); Beck (1902).
  _Apologia_, I. Casaubon (1594); Krüger (1864); (with the _Florida_),
  van der Vliet (1900). _Florida_, Krüger (1883). _De Deo Socratis_,
  Buckley (1844), Lütjohann (1878). _De Platone et ejus Dogmate_,
  Goldbacher (1876) (including _De Mundo_ and _De Deo Socratis_). For
  the relation between Lucian's [Greek: Ovos] and the _Metamorphoses_ of
  Apuleius, see Rohde, _Über Lucians Schrift [Greek: Loukios]_ (1869),
  and Burger, _De Lucio Patrensi_ (1887). On the style of Apuleius
  consult Kretzschmann, _De Latinitate L. Apulei_ (1865), and Koziol,
  _Der Stil des A._ (1872). There is a complete English translation of
  the works of Apuleius in Bohn's Classical Library. The translations
  and imitations of the _Golden Ass_ in modern languages are numerous:
  in English, by Adlington, 1566 and later eds. (reissued in the Tudor
  translations and Temple Classics), Taylor (1822) (including the
  philosophical works), Head (1851). Of the Cupid and Psyche episode
  there are recent translations by Robert Bridges (1895) (in verse),
  Stuttaford (1903); and it is beautifully introduced by Walter Pater
  into his _Marius the Epicurean_. This episode has afforded the subject
  of a drama to Thomas Heywood, and of narrative poems to Shakerley
  Marmion, Mrs. Tighe, and William Morris (in the _Earthly Paradise_).