ARABS, the name given to that branch of the Semitic race which from the
earliest historic times inhabited the south-western portion of the
Arabian peninsula. The name, to-day the collective term for the
overwhelming majority of the surviving Semitic peoples, was originally
restricted to the nomad tribes who ranged the north of the peninsula
east of Palestine and the Syro-Arabian desert. In this narrow sense
"Arab" is used in the Assyrian inscriptions, in the Old Testament and in
the Minaean inscriptions. Before the Christian era it had come to
include all the inhabitants of the peninsula. This, it is suggested, may
have been due to the fact that the "Arabs" were the chief people near
the Greek and Roman colonies in Syria and Mesopotamia. Classical writers
use the term both in its local and general sense. The Arabs to-day
occupy, besides Arabia, a part of Mesopotamia, the western shores of the
Red Sea, the eastern coast of the Persian Gulf and the north of Africa.
The finest type of the race is found in south Arabia among the Ariba
Arabs, among the mountaineers of Hadramut and Yemen and among the
Bedouin tribes roaming over the interior of central and northern Arabia.
The Arabs of the coasts and those of Mesopotamia are hybrids, showing
Turkish, Negroid and Hamitic crossings. The people of Syria and
Palestine are hybrids of Arab, Phoenician and Jewish descent. The theory
that early Arab settlements were made on the east coast of Africa as far
as Sofala south of the Zambezi, is without foundation; the earliest Arab
settlement on the east coast of Africa that can be proved is Magadoxo
(Mukdishu) in the 10th century, and the ruined cities of Mashonaland,
once supposed to be the remains of Arab settlements, are now known to be
of medieval African origin. On the East African coast-lands Arab
influence is still considerable. Traces of the Arab type are met with in
Asia Minor, the Caucasus, western Persia and India, while the influence
of the Arab language and civilization is found in Europe (Malta and
Spain), China and Central Asia.

  Ethnology.

The Arabs are at once the most ancient as they in many ways are the
purest surviving type of the true Semite. Certainly the inhabitants of
Yemen are not, and in historic times never were, pure Semites. Somali
and other elements, generally described under the collective racial name
of Hamitic, are clearly traceable; but the inland Arabs still present
the nearest approach to the primitive Semitic type. The origin of the
Arab race can only be a matter of conjecture. From the remotest historic
times it has been divided into two branches, which from their
geographical position it is simplest to call the North Arabians and the
South Arabians. Arabic and Jewish tradition trace the descent of the
latter from Joktan (Arabic _Kahtan_) son of Heber, of the former from
Ishmael. The South Arabians--the older branch--were settled in the
south-western part of the peninsula centuries before the uprise of the
Ishmaelites. These latter include not only Ishmael's direct descendants
through the twelve princes (Gen. xxv. 16), but the Edomites, Moabites,
Ammonites, Midianites and other tribes. This ancient and undoubted
division of the Arab race --roughly represented to-day by the
universally adopted classification into Arabs proper and Bedouin Arabs
(see BEDOUINS)-has caused much dispute among ethnologists. All
authorities agree in declaring the race to be Semitic in the broadest
ethnological signification of that term, but some thought they saw in
this division of the race an indication of a dual origin. They asserted
that the purer branch of the Arab family was represented by the
sedentary Arabs who were of Hamitic (Biblical Cushite), i.e. African
ancestry, and that the nomad Arabs were Arabs only by adoption, and were
nearer akin to the true Semite as sons of Ishmael. Many arguments were
adduced in support of this theory, (1) The unquestioned division in
remote historic times of the Arab race, and the immemorial hostility
between the two branches. (2) The concurrence of pre-Islamitic
literature and records in representing the first settlement of the
"pure" Arab as made in the extreme south-western part of the peninsula,
near Aden. (3) The use of Himyar, "dusky" or "red" (suggesting African
affinities), as the name sometimes for the ruling class, sometimes for
the entire people. (4) The African affinities of the Himyaritic
language. (5) The resemblance of the grammar of the Arabic now spoken by
the "pure" Arabs, where it differs from that of the North, to the
Abyssinian grammar. (6) The marked resemblance of the pre-Islamitic
institutions of Yemen and its allied provinces-its monarchies, courts,
armies and serfs--to the historical Africo-Egyptian type and even to
modern Abyssinia. (7) The physique of the "pure" Arab, the shape and
size of the head, the slenderness of the lower limbs, all suggesting an
African rather than an Asiatic origin. (8) The habits of the people,
viz. their sedentary rather than nomad occupations, their fondness for
village life, for dancing, music and society, their cultivation of the
soil, having more in common with African life than with that of the
western Asiatic continent. (9) The extreme facility of marriage which
exists in all classes of the southern Arabs with the African races, the
fecundity of such unions and the slightness or even total absence of any
caste feeling between the dusky "pure" Arab and the still darker
African, pointing to a community of origin. And further arguments were
found in the characteristics of the Bedouins, their pastoral and nomad
tendencies; the peculiarities of their idiom allied to the Hebrew; their
strong clan feeling, their continued resistance to anything like regal
power or centralized organization.

Such, briefly, were the more important arguments; but latterly
ethnologists are inclined to agree that there is little really to be
said for the African ancestry theory and that the Arab race had its
beginning in the deserts of south Arabia, that in short the true Arabs
are aborigines.

Mahommedans call the centuries before the Prophet's birth waqt-el
jahiliya, "the time of ignorance," but the fact is that the Arab world
has in some respects never since reached so high a level as it had in
those days which it suits Moslems to paint in dreary colours. Writing
was a fine art and poetry flourished. Eloquence was an accomplishment
all strove to acquire, and each year there were assemblies, lasting
sometimes a month, which were devoted to contests of skill among the
orators and poets, to listen to whose friendly rivalry tribesmen
journeyed long distances. Last, that surest index of a people's
civilization--the treatment of women--contrasted very favourably with
their position under the Koran. Women had rights and were respected. The
veil and the harem system were unknown before Mahomet. According to
Nöldeke the Nabataean inscriptions and coins show that women held a high
social position in northern Arabia, owning large estates and trading
independently. Polyandry and polygamy, it is true, were practised, but
the right of divorce belonged to the woman as well as the man. Two kinds
of marriage were celebrated. One was a purely personal contract, with no
witnesses, the wife not leaving her home or passing under marital
authority. The other was a formal marriage, the woman becoming subject
to her husband by purchase or capture. Even captive women were not kept
in slavery. Arabic wealth and culture had indeed thus early reached a
stage which justified Professor Robertson Smith in writing, "In this
period the name of Arab was associated to Western writers with ideas of
effeminate indolence and peaceful opulence ... the golden age of Yemen."
But long before Mahomet's time this early Arab predominance was at an
end, possibly due in great measure to the loss of the caravan trade
through the increase of shipping. The abandonment of great cities and
the ruin of many tribes contributed to the apparent nationalization of
the Arab peoples. Though the traditional jealousy and hostility of the
two branches, the Yemenites and Maadites or Ishmaelites, remained, the
Arab world had attained by the levelling process of common misfortune
the superficial unity it presents to-day. The nation thus formed, never
a nation in the strict sense of the word, was distinctively and
thoroughly Semitic in character and language, and has remained unchanged
to the present day. The sporadic brilliancy of the ancient Arab kingdoms
gave place to a social and political lethargy, the continuation of which
for many centuries made the uprise of Saracenic empires seem a miracle
to a world ignorant of the Arab past. The Arab race up to Mahomet's day
had been in the main pagan. Monotheism, if it ever prevailed, early gave
place to sun and star worship, or simple idolatry. Professor Robertson
Smith suggests that totemism was the earliest form of Arabian idolatry,
and that each tribe had its sacred animal. This he supports by the fact
that some tribal names were derived from those of animals, and that
animal-worship was not unknown in Arabia. What seems certain is that
Arab religion was of a complex hybrid nature, not much to be wondered at
when one remembers that Arabia was the asylum of many religious
refugees, Zoroastrians, Jews, Christians. In the later pre-Islamitic
times spirits, or jinns, as they were called, of which each tribe or
family had its own, were worshipped, and there was but a vague idea of a
Supreme Being. Images of the jinns to the number of 360, one for each
day of the lunar year, were collected in the temple at Mecca, the chief
seat of their worship. That worship was of a sanguinary nature. Human
sacrifice was fairly frequent. Under the guise of religion female
infanticide was a common practice. At Mecca the great object of worship
was a plain black stone, and to it pilgrimages were made from every part
of Arabia. This stone was so sacred to the Arabs that even Mahomet dared
not dispense with it, and it remains the central object of sanctity in
the Ka'ba to-day. The temples of the Sabaeans and the Minaeans were
built east of their cities, a fact suggesting sun-worship, yet this is
not believed to have been the cult of the Minaeans. Common to both was
the worship of Attar, the male Ashtoreth.

With the appearance of Mahomet the Arabs took anew a place in the
world's history.

  Physique.

Physically the Arabs are one of the strongest and noblest races of the
world. Baron de Larrey, surgeon-general to Napoleon on his expedition to
Egypt and Syria, writes: "Their physical structure is in all respects
more perfect than that of Europeans; their organs of sense exquisitely
acute, their size above the average of men in general, their figure
robust and elegant, their colour brown; their intelligence proportionate
to their physical perfection and without doubt superior, other things
being equal, to that of other nations." The typical Arab face is of an
oval form, lean-featured; the eyes a brilliant black, deep-set under
bushy eyebrows; nose aquiline, forehead straight but not high. In body
the Arab is muscular and long-limbed, but lean. Deformed individuals or
dwarfs are rare among Arabs; nor, except leprosy, which is common, does
any disease seem to be hereditary among them. They often suffer from
ophthalmia, though not in the virulent Egyptian form. They are
scrupulously clean in their persons, and take special care of their
teeth, which are generally white and even. Simple and abstemious in
their habits, they often reach an extreme yet healthy old age; nor is it
common among them for the faculties of the mind to give way sooner than
those of the body.

  Character.

Thus, physically, they yield to few races, if any, of mankind; mentally,
they surpass most, and are only kept back in the march of progress by
the remarkable defect of organizing power and incapacity for combined
action. Lax and imperfect as are their forms of government, it is with
impatience that even these are borne; of the four caliphs who alone
reigned--if reign theirs could be called--in Arabia proper, three died a
violent death; and of the Wahhabi princes, the most genuine
representatives in later times of pure Arab rule, almost all have met
the same fate. The Arab face, which is not unkindly, but never smiling,
expresses that dignity and gravity which are typical of the race. While
the Arab is always polite, good-natured, manly and brave, he is also
revengeful, cruel, untruthful and superstitious. Of the Arab nature
Burckhardt (other authorities, e.g. Barth and Rohlfs, are far less
complimentary) wrote: "The Arab displays his manly character when he
defends his guest at the peril of his own life, and submits to the
reverses of fortune, to disappointment and distress, with the most
patient resignation. He is distinguished from a Turk by the virtues of
pity and gratitude. The Turk is cruel, the Arab of a more kind temper;
he pities and supports the wretched, and never forgets the generosity
shown to him even by an enemy." The Arab will lie and cheat and swear
false oaths, but once his word is pledged he may be trusted to the last.
There are some oaths such as _Wallah_ (by Allah) which mean nothing, but
such an oath as the threefold one with _wa, bi_ and _ta_ as particles of
swearing the meanest thief will not break. In temper, or at least in the
manifestation of it, the Arab is studiously calm; and he rarely so much
as raises his voice in a dispute. But this outward tranquillity covers
feelings alike keen and permanent; and the remembrance of a rash jest or
injurious word, uttered years before, leads only too often to that
blood-revenge which is a sacred duty everywhere in Arabia.

There exist, however, marked tribal or almost semi-national diversities
of character among the Arabs. Thus, the inhabitants of Hejaz are noted
for courtesy and blamed for fickleness; those of Nejd are distinguished
by their stern tenacity and dignity of deportment; the nations of Yemen
are gentle and pliant, but revengeful; those of Hasa and Oman cheerful
and fond of sport, though at the same time turbulent and unsteady.
Anything approaching to a game is rare in Nejd, and in the Hejaz
religion and the yearly occurrence of the pilgrim ceremonies almost
exclude all public diversions; but in Yemen the well-known game of the
"jerid," or palm-stick, with dances and music is not rare. In Oman such
amusements are still more frequent. Again in Yemen and Oman,
coffee-houses, where people resort for conversation, and where public
recitals, songs and other amusements are indulged in, stand open all
day; while nothing of the sort is tolerated in Nejd. So too the
ceremonies of circumcision or marriage are occasions of gaiety and
pastime on the coast, but not in the central provinces.

  Manners and customs.

An Arab town, or even village, except it be the merest hamlet, is
invariably walled round; but seldom is a stronger material than dried
earth used; the walls are occasionally flanked by towers of like
construction. A dry ditch often surrounds the whole. The streets are
irregular and seldom parallel. The Arab, indeed, lacks an eye for the
straight. The Arab carpenter cannot form a right angle; an Arab servant
cannot place a cloth square on a table. The Ka'ba at Mecca has none of
its sides or angles equal. The houses are of one or two storeys, rarely
of three, with flat mud roofs, little windows and no external ornament.
If the town be large, the expansion of one or two streets becomes a
market-place, where are ranged a few shops of eatables, drugs, coffee,
cottons or other goods. Many of these shops are kept by women. The chief
mosque is always near the market-place; so is also the governor's
residence, which, except in size and in being more or less fortified
Arab fashion, does not differ from a private house. Drainage is
unthought of; but the extreme dryness of the air obviates the
inconvenience and disease that under other skies could not fail to
ensue, and which in the damper climates of the coast make themselves
seriously felt. But the streets are roughly swept every day, each
householder taking care of the roadway that lies before his own door.
Whitewash and colour are occasionally used in Yemen, Hejaz and Oman;
elsewhere a light ochre tint, the colour of the sun-dried bricks,
predominates, and gives an Arab town the appearance at a distance of a
large dust-heap in the centre of the bright green ring of gardens and
palm-groves. Baked bricks are unknown in Arabia, and stone buildings are
rare, especially in Nejd. Palm branches and the like, woven in wattles,
form the dwellings, of the poorer classes in the southern districts.
Many Arab towns possess watch-towers, like huge round factory chimneys
in appearance, built of sun-dried bricks, and varying in height from 50
to 100 ft. or even more. Indeed, two of these constructions at the town
of Birkat-el-Mauj, in Oman, are said to be each of 170 ft. in height,
and that of Nezwah, in the same province, is reckoned at 140; but these
are of stone.

The principal feature in the interior of an Arab house is the "kahwah"
or coffee-room. It is a large apartment spread with mats, and sometimes
furnished with carpets and a few cushions. At one end is a small furnace
or fireplace for preparing coffee. In this room the men congregate; here
guests are received, and even lodged; women rarely enter it, except at
times when strangers are unlikely to be present. Some of these
apartments are very spacious and supported by pillars; one wall is
usually built transversely to the compass direction of the Ka'ba; it
serves to facilitate the performance of prayer by those who may happen
to be in the kahwah at the appointed times. The other rooms are
ordinarily small.

The Arabs are proverbially hospitable. A stranger's arrival is often the
occasion of an amicable dispute among the wealthier inhabitants as to
who shall have the privilege of receiving him. Arab cookery is of the
simplest. Roughly-ground wheat cooked with butter; bread in thin cakes,
prepared on a heated iron plate or against the walls of an open oven; a
few vegetables, generally of the leguminous kinds; boiled mutton or
camel's flesh, among the wealthy; dates and fruits--this is the _menu_
of an ordinary meal. Rice is eaten by the rich and fish is common on the
coasts. Tea, introduced only a few decades back, is now largely drunk. A
food of which the Arabs are fond is locusts boiled in salt and water and
then dried in the sun. They taste like stale shrimps, but there is a
great sale for them. Spices are freely employed; butter much too largely
for a European taste.

After eating, the hands are always washed, soap or the ashes of an
alkaline plant being used. A covered censer with burning incense is then
passed round, and each guest perfumes his hands, face, and sometimes his
clothes; this censer serves also on first receptions and whenever
special honour is intended. In Yemen and Oman scented water often does
duty for it. Coffee, without milk or sugar, but flavoured with an
aromatic seed brought from India, is served to all. This, too, is done
on the occasion of a first welcome, when the cups often make two or
three successive rounds; but, in fact, coffee is made and drunk at any
time, as frequently as the desire for it may suggest itself; and each
time fresh grains are sifted, roasted, pounded and boiled--a very
laborious process, and one that requires in the better sort of
establishments a special servant or slave for the work. Arabs generally
make but one solid meal a day--that of supper, soon after sunset. Even
then they do not eat much, gluttony being rare among them, and even
daintiness esteemed disgraceful. Wine, like other fermented drinks, is
prohibited by the Koran, and is, in fact, very rarely taken, though the
inhabitants of the mountains of Oman are said to indulge in it. On the
coast spirits of the worst quality are sometimes procured; opium and
hashish are sparingly indulged in. On the other hand, wherever
Wahhabiism has left freedom of action, tobacco-smoking prevails; short
pipes of clay, long pipes with large open bowls, or most frequently the
water-pipe or "nar-ghileh," being used. The tobacco smoked is generally
strong and is either brought from the neighbourhood of Bagdad or grown
in the country itself. The strongest quality is that of Oman; the leaf
is broad and coarse, and retains its green colour even when dried; a few
whiffs have been known to produce absolute stupor. The aversion of the
Wahhabis to tobacco is well known; they entitle it "mukhzi" or "the
shameful," and its use is punished with blows, as the public use of wine
would be elsewhere.

  Dress.

In dress much variety prevails. The loose cotton drawers girded at the
waist, which in hot climates do duty for trousers, are not often worn,
even by the upper classes, in Nejd or Yemama, where a kind of silk
dressing-gown is thrown over the long shirt; frequently, too, a brown or
black cloak distinguishes the wealthier citizen; his head-dress is a
handkerchief fastened round the head by a band. But in Hejaz, Yemen and
Oman, turbans are by no means uncommon; the ordinary colour is white;
they are worn over one or more skullcaps. Trousers also form part of the
dress in the two former of these districts; and a voluminous sash, in
which a dagger or an inkstand is stuck, is wrapped round the waist. The
poorer folk, however, and the villagers often content themselves with a
broad piece of cloth round the loins, and another across the shoulders.
In Oman trousers are rare, but over the shirt a long gown, of peculiar
and somewhat close-fitting cut, dyed yellow, is often worn. The women in
these provinces commonly put on loose drawers and some add veils to
their head-dresses; they are over-fond of ornaments (gold and silver);
their hair is generally arranged in a long plait hanging down behind.
All men allow their beards and moustaches full growth, though this is
usually scanty. Most Arabs shave their heads, and indeed all, strictly
speaking, ought by Mahommedan custom to do so. An Arab seldom or never
dyes his hair. Sandals are worn more often than shoes; none but the very
poorest go barefoot.

  Slavery.

Slavery is still, as of old times, a recognized institution throughout
Arabia; and an illicit traffic in blacks is carried on along the coasts
of the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. The slaves themselves were obtained
chiefly from the east African coast districts down as far as Zanzibar,
but this source of supply was practically closed by the end of the 19th
century. Slaves are usually employed in Arabia as herdsmen or as
domestic servants, rarely in agricultural work; they also form a
considerable portion of the bodyguards with which Eastern greatness
loves to surround itself. Like their countrymen elsewhere, they readily
embrace the religion of their masters and become zealous Mahommedans.
Arab custom enfranchises a slave who has accepted Islam at the end of
seven years of bondage, and when that period has arrived, the master,
instead of exacting from his slave the price of freedom, generally, on
giving him his liberty, adds the requisite means for supporting himself
and a family in comfort. Further, on every important occasion, such as a
birth, circumcision, a marriage or a death, one or more of the household
slaves are sure of acquiring their freedom. Hence Arabia has a
considerable free black population; and these again, by inter-marriage
with the whites around, have filled the land with a mulatto breed of
every shade, till, in the eastern and southern provinces especially, a
white skin is almost an exception. In Arabia no prejudice exists against
negro alliances; no social or political line separates the African from
the Arab. A negro may become a sheik, a kadi, an amir, or whatever his
industry and his talents may render him capable of being. This is
particularly so in Nejd, Yemen and Hadramut; in the Hejaz and the north
a faint line of demarcation may be observed between the races.

  Military qualities.

The Arabs are good soldiers but poor generals. Personal courage,
wonderful endurance of privation, fixity of purpose, and a contempt of
death are qualities common to almost every race, tribe and clan that
compose the Arab nation. In skirmishing and harassing they have few
equals, while at close quarters they have often shown themselves capable
of maintaining, armed with swords and spears alone, a desperate struggle
against guns and bayonets, neither giving nor receiving quarter. Nor are
they wholly ignorant of tactics, their armies, when engaged in regular
war, being divided into centre and wings, with skirmishers in front and
a reserve behind, often screened at the outset of the engagement by the
camels of the expedition. These animals, kneeling and ranged in long
parallel rows, form a sort of entrenchment, from behind which the
soldiers of the main body fire their matchlocks, while the front
divisions, opening out, act on either flank of the enemy. This
arrangement of troops may be traced in Arab records as far back as the
5th century, and was often exemplified during the Wahhabi wars.

Arab women are scarcely less distinguished for their bravery than the
men. Records of armed heroines occur frequently in the chronicles or
myths of the pre-Islamitic time; and in authentic history the Battle of
the Camel, 656 A.D., where Ayesha, the wife of Mahomet, headed the
charge, is only the first of a number of instances in which Arab amazons
have taken, sword in hand, no inconsiderable share in the wars and
victories of Islam. Even now it is the custom for an Arab force to be
always accompanied by some courageous maiden, who, mounted on a
blackened camel, leads the onslaught, singing verses of encouragement
for her own, of insult for the opposing tribe. Round her litter the
fiercest of the battle rages, and her capture or death is the signal of
utter rout; it is hers also to head the triumph after the victory of her
clan.

  Education.

There is little education, in the European sense of the word, in Arabia.
Among the Bedouins there are no schools, and few, even of the most
elementary character, in the towns or villages. Where they exist, little
beyond the mechanical reading of the Koran, and the equally mechanical
learning of it by rote, is taught. On the other hand, Arab
male-children, brought up from early years among the grown-up men of the
house or tent, learn more from their own parents and at home than is
common in other countries; reading and writing are in most instances
thus acquired, or rather transmitted; besides such general principles
of grammar and eloquence, often of poetry and history, as the elders
themselves may be able to impart. To this family schooling too are due
the good manners, politeness, and self-restraint that early distinguish
Arab children. In the very few instances where a public school of a
higher class exists, writing, grammar and rhetoric sum up its teachings.
Law and theology, in the narrow sense that both these words have in the
Islamitic system, are explained in afternoon lectures given in most
mosques; and some verses of the Koran, with one of the accepted
commentaries, that of Baidawi for example, form the basis of the
instruction. Great attention is paid to accuracy of grammar and purity
of diction throughout Arabia; yet something of a dialectic difference
may be observed in the various districts. The purest Arabic, that which
is as nearly as possible identical in the choice of words and in its
inflections with the language of the Koran, is spoken in Nejd, and the
best again of that in the province of Suder. Next in purity comes the
Arabic of Shammar. Throughout the Hejaz in general, the language, though
extremely elegant, is not equally correct; in el-Hasa, Bahrein and Oman
it is decidedly influenced by the foreign element called Nabataean. In
Yemen, as in other southern districts of the peninsula, Arabic merges
insensibly into the Himyaritic or African dialect of Hadramut and Mahra.
(See SEMITIC LANGUAGES.)

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Lieutenant Wellsted, _Travels in Arabia_ (Lond., 1838);
  "Narrative of a Journey to the Ruins of Nakeb el Hajar" (_Jour. R.
  Geog. Soc._ vii. 20); Carsten Niebuhr. _Travels through Arabia_
  (transl. into English by Robert Heron, 2 vols., Edin., 1792); John
  Lewis Burckhardt, _Travels in Arabia_ (2 vols., Lond., 1829); _Notes
  on the Bedouins and Wahabis_, (2 vols., Lond., 1830; in German,
  Weimar, 1831); C.J. Cruttenden, _Journal of an Excursion to Sana'a,
  the Capital of Yemen_ (Bombay, 1838); A. Sprenger, _Die alte
  Geographie Arabiens als Grundlage der Entwicklungsgeschichte des
  Semitismus_ (Berne, 1875); Sir Richard F. Burton, _Personal Narrative
  of a Pilgrimage to El Medinah and Meccah_ (Lond., 1855); W. Robertson
  Smith, _Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia_ (Cambridge); E. Reclus,
  _Les Arabes_ (Brussels, 1898); Lady Anne Blunt, _A Pilgrimage to Nejd_
  (2 vols., Lond., 1881); C.M. Doughty, _Arabia Deserta_ (2 vols.,
  1888); Rev. S.M. Zwemer, _Arabia: the Cradle of Islam_ (1900);
  Albrecht Zehme, _Arabien und die Araber, seit hundert Jahren_ (1875).