ARAD, or Ó-ARAD, a town of Hungary, capital of the county of the same
name, 159 m. S.E. of Budapest by rail. Pop. (1900) 53,903. It is
situated on the right bank of the river Maros, and consists of the inner
town and five suburbs. Arad is a modern-built town, and contains many
handsome private and public buildings, including a cathedral. It is the
seat of a Greek-Orthodox bishop, and possesses a Greek-Orthodox
theological seminary, two training schools for teachers--one Hungarian,
and the other Rumanian--and a conservatoire for music. The town played
an important part in the Hungarian revolution of 1848-49, and possesses
a museum containing relics of this war of independence. One of the
public squares contains a martyrs' monument, erected in memory of the
thirteen Hungarian generals shot here on the 6th of October 1849, by
order of the Austrian general Haynau. It consists of a colossal figure
of Hungary, with four allegorical groups, and medallions of the
executed generals. Arad is an important railway junction, and has become
the largest industrial and commercial centre of south-eastern Hungary.
Its principal industries are: distilling, milling, machinery-making,
leather-working and saw-milling. A large trade is carried on in grain,
flour, alcohol, cattle and wood. Arad was a fortified place, and was
captured by the Turks during the wars of the 17th century, and kept by
them till the end of that century. The new fortress, built in 1763,
although small, was formidable, and played a great role during the
Hungarian struggle for independence in 1849. Bravely defended by the
Austrian general Berger until the 1st of July 1849, it was then captured
by the Hungarian rebels, who made it their headquarters during the
latter part of the insurrection. It was from it that Kossuth issued his
famous proclamation (11th August 1849), and it was here that he handed
over the supreme military and civil power to Görgei. The fortress was
recaptured shortly after the surrender of Görgei to the Russians at
Világos. The fortress is now used as an ammunition depot.

The town of Uj-Arad, i.e. New Arad (pop. 6124), situated on the opposite
bank of the Maros, is practically a suburb of Arad, with which it is
connected by a bridge. The town was founded during the Turkish wars of
the 17th century. The works erected by the Turks for the capture of the
fortress of Arad formed the nucleus of the new town.

Világos, the town where the famous capitulation of Görgei to the
Russians took place on the 13th of August 1849, lies 21 m. by rail
north-east of Arad.