ARAGO, DOMINIQUE FRANÇOIS JEAN (1786-1853), French physicist, was born
on the 26th of February 1786, at Estagel, a small village near
Perpignan, in the department of the eastern Pyrenees. He was the eldest
of four brothers. Jean (1788-1836) emigrated to America and became a
general in the Mexican army. Jacques Étienne Victor (1799-1855) took
part in L.C. de S. de Freycinet's exploring voyage in the "Uranie" from
1817 to 1821, and on his return to France devoted himself to journalism
and the drama. The fourth brother, Étienne Vincent (1802-1892), is said
to have collaborated with H. de Balzac in the _Héritière de Birague_,
and from 1822 to 1847 wrote a great number of light dramatic pieces,
mostly in collaboration. A strong republican, he was obliged to leave
France in 1849, but returned after the amnesty of 1859. In 1879 he was
nominated director of the Luxembourg museum.

Showing decided military tastes François Arago was sent to the municipal
college of Perpignan, where he began to study mathematics in preparation
for the entrance examination of the polytechnic school. Within two years
and a half he had mastered all the subjects prescribed for examination,
and a great deal more, and, on going up for examination at Toulouse, he
astounded his examiner by his knowledge of Lagrange. Towards the close
of 1803 he entered the polytechnic school, with the artillery service as
the aim of his ambition, and in 1804, through the advice and
recommendation of S.D. Poisson, he received the appointment of secretary
to the Observatory of Paris. He now became acquainted with Laplace, and
through his influence was commissioned, with J.B. Biot, to complete the
meridional measurements which had been begun by J.B.J. Delambre, and
interrupted since the death of P.F.A. Méchain (1744-1804). The two left
Paris in 1806 and began operations among the mountains of Spain, but
Biot returned to Paris after they had determined the latitude of
Formentera, the southernmost point to which they were to carry the
survey, leaving Arago to make the geodetical connexion of Majorca with
Ivica and with Formentera.

The adventures and difficulties of the latter were now only beginning.
The political ferment caused by the entrance of the French into Spain
extended to these islands, and the ignorant populace began to suspect
that Arago's movements and his blazing fires on the top of Mount Galatzo
were telegraphic signals to the invading army. Ultimately they became so
infuriated that he was obliged to cause himself to be incarcerated in
the fortress of Belver in June 1808. On the 28th of July he managed to
escape from the island in a fishing-boat, and after an adventurous
voyage he reached Algiers on the 3rd of August. Thence he procured a
passage in a vessel bound for Marseilles, but on the 16th of August,
just as the vessel was nearing Marseilles, it fell into the hands of a
Spanish corsair. With the rest of the crew, Arago was taken to Rosas,
and imprisoned first in a windmill, and afterwards in the fortress of
that seaport, until the town fell into the hands of the French, when the
prisoners were transferred to Palamos. After fully three months'
imprisonment they were released on the demand of the dey of Algiers, and
again set sail for Marseilles on the 28th of November, but when within
sight of their port they were driven back by a northerly wind to Bougie
on the coast of Africa. Transport to Algiers by sea from this place
would have occasioned a weary stay of three months; Arago, therefore,
set out for it by land under conduct of a Mahommedan priest, and reached
it on Christmas day. After six months' stay in Algiers he once again, on
the 21st of June 1809, set sail for Marseilles, where he had to undergo
a monotonous and inhospitable quarantine in the lazaretto, before his
difficulties were over. The first letter he received, while in the
lazaretto, was from A. von Humboldt; and this was the origin of a
connexion which, in Arago's words, "lasted over forty years without a
single cloud ever having troubled it."

Through all these vicissitudes Arago had succeeded in preserving the
records of his survey; and his first act on his return home was to
deposit them in the Bureau des Longitudes at Paris. As a reward for his
adventurous conduct in the cause of science, he was in September 1809
elected a member of the Academy of Sciences, in room of J.B.L. Lalande,
at the remarkably early age of twenty-three, and before the close of the
same year he was chosen by the council of the polytechnic school to
succeed G. Monge in the chair of analytical geometry. About the same
time he was named by the emperor one of the astronomers of the Royal
Observatory, which was accordingly his residence till his death, and it
was in this capacity that he delivered his remarkably successful series
of popular lectures on astronomy, which were continued from 1812 to
1845.

In 1816, along with Gay-Lussac, he started the _Annales de chimie et de
physique_, and in 1818 or 1819 he proceeded along with Biot to execute
geodetic operations on the coasts of France, England and Scotland. They
measured the length of the seconds-pendulum at Leith, and in Unst, one
of the Shetland isles, the results of the observations being published
in 1821, along with those made in Spain. Arago was elected a member of
the Board of Longitude immediately afterwards, and contributed to each
of its _Annuals_, for about twenty-two years, important scientific
notices on astronomy and meteorology and occasionally on civil
engineering, as well as interesting memoirs of members of the Academy.

In 1830, Arago, who always professed liberal opinions of the extreme
republican type, was elected a member of the chamber of deputies for the
Lower Seine, and he employed his splendid gifts of eloquence and
scientific knowledge in all questions connected with public education,
the rewards of inventors, and the encouragement of the mechanical and
practical sciences. Many of the most creditable national enterprises,
dating from this period, are due to his advocacy--such as the reward to
L.J.M. Daguerre for the invention of photography, the grant for the
publication of the works of P. Fermat and Laplace, the acquisition of
the museum of Cluny, the development of railways and electric
telegraphs, the improvement of the navigation of the Seine, and the
boring of the artesian wells at Grenelle.

In the year 1830 also he was appointed director of the Observatory, and
as a member of the chamber of deputies he was able to obtain grants of
money for rebuilding it in part, and for the addition of magnificent
instruments. In the same year, too, he was chosen perpetual secretary of
the Academy of Sciences, in room of J.B.J. Fourier. Arago threw his
whole soul into its service, and by his faculty of making friends he
gained at once for it and for himself a world-wide reputation. As
perpetual secretary it fell to him to pronounce historical _éloges_ on
deceased members; and for this duty his rapidity and facility of
thought, his happy piquancy of style, and his extensive knowledge
peculiarly adapted him.

In 1834 he again visited England, to attend the meeting of the British
Association at Edinburgh. From this time till 1848 he led a life of
comparative quiet--not the quiet of inactivity, however, for his
incessant labours within the Academy and the Observatory produced a
multitude of contributions to all departments of physical science,--but
on the fall of Louis Philippe he left his laboratory to join in forming
the provisional government. He was entrusted with the discharge of two
important functions, that had never before been united in one person,
viz. the ministry of war and of marine; and in the latter capacity he
effected some salutary reforms, such as the improvement of rations in
the navy and the abolition of flogging. He also abolished political
oaths of all kinds, and, against an array of moneyed interests,
succeeded in procuring the abolition of negro slavery in the French
colonies.

In the beginning of May 1852, when the government of Louis Napoleon
required an oath of allegiance from all its functionaries, Arago
peremptorily refused, and sent in his resignation of his post as
astronomer at the Bureau des Longitudes. This, however, the prince
president, to his credit, declined to accept, and made "an exception in
favour of a _savant_ whose works had thrown lustre on France, and whose
existence his government would regret to embitter." But the tenure of
office thus granted did not prove of long duration. Arago was now on his
death-bed, under a complication of diseases, induced, no doubt, by the
hardships and labours of his earlier years. In the summer of 1853 he was
advised by his physicians to try the effect of his native air, and he
accordingly set out for the eastern Pyrenees. But the change was
unavailing, and after a lingering illness, in which he suffered first
from diabetes, then from Bright's disease, complicated by dropsy, he
died in Paris on the 2nd of October 1853.

Arago's fame as an experimenter and discoverer rests mainly on his
contributions to magnetism and still more to optics. He found that a
magnetic needle, made to oscillate over nonferruginous surfaces, such as
water, glass, copper, &c., falls more rapidly in the extent of its
oscillations according as it is more or less approached to the surface.
This discovery, which gained him the Copley medal of the Royal Society
in 1825, was followed by another, that a rotating plate of copper tends
to communicate its motion to a magnetic needle suspended over it
("magnetism of rotation"). Arago is also fairly entitled to be regarded
as having proved the long-suspected connexion between the aurora
borealis and the variations of the magnetic elements.

In optics we owe to him not only important optical discoveries of his
own, but the credit of stimulating the genius of A.J. Fresnel, with
whose history, as well as with that of E.L. Malus and of Thomas Young,
this part of his life is closely interwoven. Shortly after the beginning
of the 19th century the labours of these three philosophers were shaping
the modern doctrine of the undulatory theory of light. Fresnel's
arguments in favour of that theory found little favour with Laplace,
Poisson and Biot, the champions of the emission theory; but they were
ardently espoused by Humboldt and by Arago, who had been appointed by
the Academy to report on the paper. This was the foundation of an
intimate friendship between Arago and Fresnel, and of a determination to
carry on together further researches in this subject, which led to the
enunciation of the fundamental laws of the polarization of light known
by their names (see POLARIZATION). As a result of this work Arago
constructed a _polariscope_, which he used for some interesting
observations on the polarization of the light of the sky. To him is also
due the discovery of the power of _rotatory polarization_ exhibited by
quartz, and last of all, among his many contributions to the support of
the undulatory hypothesis, comes the _experimentum crucis_ which he
proposed to carry out for comparing directly the velocity of light in
air and in water or glass. On the emission theory the velocity should be
accelerated by an increase of density in the medium; on the wave theory,
it should be retarded. In 1838 he communicated to the Academy the
details of his apparatus, which utilized the revolving mirrors employed
by Sir C. Wheatstone in 1835 for measuring the velocity of the electric
discharge; but owing to the great care required in the carrying out of
the project, and to the interruption to his labours caused by the
revolution of 1848, it was the spring of 1850 before he was ready to put
his idea to the test; and then his eyesight suddenly gave way. Before
his death, however, the retardation of light in denser media was
demonstrated by the experiments of H.L. Fizeau and J.B.L. Foucault,
which, with improvements in detail, were based on the plan proposed by
him.

  Arago's _OEuvres_ were published after his death under the direction
  of J.A. Barral, in 17 vols., 8vo, 1854-1862; also separately his
  _Astronomie populaire_, in 4 vols.; _Notices biographiques_, in 3
  vols.; _Notices scientifiques_, in 5 vols.; _Voyages scientifiques_,
  in 1 vol.; _Mémoires scientifiques_, in 2 vols.; _Mélanges_, in 1
  vol.; and _Tables analytiques et documents importants_ (with
  portrait), in 1 vol. English translations of the following portions of
  his works have appeared:--_Treatise on Comets_, by C. Gold, C.B.
  (London, 1833); also translated by Smyth and Grant (London, 1861);
  _Hist. éloge of James Watt_, by James Muirhead (London, 1839); also
  translated, with notes, by Lord Brougham; _Popular Lectures on
  Astronomy_, by Walter Kelly and Rev. L. Tomlinson (London, 1854); also
  translated by Dr W.H. Smyth and Prof. R. Grant, 2 vols. (London,
  1855); _Arago's Autobiography_, translated by the Rev. Baden Powell
  (London, 1855, 1858); _Arago's Meteorological Essays_, with
  introduction by Humboldt, translated under the superintendence of
  Colonel Sabine (London, 1855), and _Arago's Biographies of Scientific
  Men_, translated by Smyth, Powell and Grant, 8vo (London, 1857).