ARAGON, or ARRAGON (in Span. _Aragón_), a captaincy-general, and
formerly a kingdom of Spain; bounded on the N. by the Pyrenees, which
separate it from France, on the E. by Catalonia and Valencia, S. by
Valencia, and W. by the two Castiles and Navarre. Pop. (1900) 912,711;
area, 18,294 sq. m. Aragon was divided in 1833 into the provinces of
Huesca, Teruel and Saragossa; an account of its modern condition is
therefore given under these names, which have not, however, superseded
the older designation in popular usage.

Aragon consists of a central plain, edged by mountain ranges. On the
south, east and west, these ranges, though wild and rugged, are of no
great elevation, but on the north the Pyrenees attain their greatest
altitude in the peaks of Aneto (11,168 ft.) and Monte Perdido (10,998
ft.)--also known as Las Tres Sorores, and, in French, as Mont Perdu. The
central pass over the Pyrenees is the Port de Canfranc, on the line
between Saragossa and Pau. Aragon is divided by the river Ebro (q.v.),
which flows through it in a south-easterly direction, into two nearly
equal parts, known as Trans-ibero and Cis-ibero. The Ebro is the
principal river, and receives from the north, in its passage through the
province, the Arba, the Gallego and the united waters of the Cinca,
Esera, Noguera Ribagorzana, Noguera Pallaresa and Segre--the last three
belonging to Catalonia. From the south it receives the Jalon and Jiloca
(or _Xalon_ and _Xiloca_) and the Guadalope. The Imperial Canal of
Aragon, which was begun by the emperor Charles V. in 1529, but remained
unfinished for nearly two hundred years, extends from Tudela to El Burgo
de Ebro, a distance of 80 m.; it has a depth of 9 ft., and an average
breadth of 69, and is navigable for vessels of about 80 tons. The Royal
Canal of Tauste, which lies along the north side of the Ebro, was cut
for purposes of irrigation, and gives fertility to the district. Two
leagues north-north-east of Albarracin is the remarkable fountain called
Cella, 3700 ft. above the sea, which forms the source of the Jiloca; and
between this river and the Sierra Molina is an extensive lake called
Gallocanta, covering about 6000 acres. The climate is characterized by
extreme heat in the summer and cold in the winter; among the mountains
the snowfall is heavy, and thunderstorms are frequent, but there is
comparatively little rain.

Within a recent geological period, central Aragon was undoubtedly
submerged by the sea, and the parched chalky soil remains saturated with
salt, while many of the smaller streams run brackish. As the mountains
of Valencia and Catalonia effectually bar out the fertilizing moisture
of the sea-winds, much of the province is a sheer wilderness, stony,
ash-coloured, scarred with dry watercourses, and destitute of any
vegetation except thin grass and heaths. In contrast with the splendid
fertility of Valencia or the south of France, the landscape of this
region, like the rest of central Spain, seems almost a continuation of
the north African desert area. There are, however, extensive oak, pine
and beech forests in the highlands, and many beautiful oases in the
deeply sunk valleys, and along the rivers, especially beside the Ebro,
which is, therefore, often called the "Nile of Aragon." In such oases
the flora is exceedingly rich. Wheat, maize, rice, oil, flax and hemp,
of fine quality, are grown in considerable quantities; as well as
saffron, madder, liquorice, sumach, and a variety of fruits. Merino wool
is one of the chief products.

In purity of race the Aragonese are probably equal to the Castilians, to
whom, rather than to the Catalans or Valencians, they are also allied in
character. The dress of the women is less distinctive than that of the
men, who wear a picturesque black and white costume, with knee-breeches,
a brilliantly coloured sash, black hempen sandals, and a handkerchief
wound round the head.

Three counties--Sobrarbe, situated near the headwaters of the Cinca,
Aragon, to the west, and Ribagorza or Ribagorça, to the east--are
indicated by tradition and the earliest chronicles as the cradle of the
Aragonese monarchy. These districts were never wholly subdued when the
Moors overran the country (711-713). Sobrarbe especially was for a time
the headquarters of the Christian defence in eastern Spain. About 1035,
Sancho III. the Great, ruler of the newly established kingdom of
Navarre, which included the three counties above mentioned, bequeathed
them to Gonzalez and Ramiro, his sons. Ramiro soon rid himself of his
rival, and welded Sobrarbe, Ribagorza and Aragon into a single kingdom,
which thenceforward grew rapidly in size and power and shared with
Castile the chief part in the struggle against the Moors. The history of
this period, which was terminated by the union of Castile and Aragon
under Ferdinand and Isabella in 1479, is given, along with a full
account of the very interesting constitution of Aragon, under SPAIN
(q.v.). At the height of its power under James I. (1213-1276), the
kingdom included Valencia, Catalonia, the Balearic Islands and the
considerable territory of Montpellier in France; while Peter III.
(1276-1285) added Sicily to his dominions.

  The literature relating to Aragon is very extensive. See, in addition
  to the works cited in the article SPAIN (section _History_), "Les
  Archives d'Aragon et de Navarre," by L. Cadier, in _Bibliothèque de
  l'École des Chartes_, 49 (Paris, 1888). Among the more important
  original authorities, the following may be selected:--for general
  history, _Anales de la corona de Aragón_, by G. Çurita, 3rd ed. in 7
  folio volumes (Saragossa, 1668-1671; 1st ed. 1562-1580);--for
  ecclesiastical history, _Teatro histórico de las iglesias de Aragón_
  (Pamplona, 1770-1807); for economic history, _História de la economia
  politica de Aragón_, by I.J. de Asso y del Rio (Saragossa, 1798). For
  the constitution and laws of Aragon, see _Orígines del Justicia de
  Aragón_, &c., by J. Ribera Tarrago (Saragossa, 1897), and
  _Instituciones y reyes de Aragón_, by V. Balaguér (Madrid, 1896). The
  topography, inhabitants, art, products, &c., of the kingdom are
  described in a volume of the series _España_ entitled _Aragón_, by
  J.M. Quadrado (Barcelona, 1886).