ARAKCHEEV, ALEKSYEI ANDREEVICH, COUNT (1769-1834), Russian soldier and
statesman, was descended from an ancient family of Great Novgorod. From
his mother, Elizabeth Vitlitsaya, he inherited most of his
characteristics, an insatiable love of work, an almost pedantic love of
order and the most rigorous sense of duty. In 1788 he entered the corps
of noble cadets in the artillery and engineering department, where his
ability, especially in mathematics, soon attracted attention. In July
1791 he was made an adjutant on the staff of Count N.I. Saltuikov, who
(September 1792) recommended him to the cesarevich Paul Petrovich as the
artillery officer most capable of reorganizing the army corps maintained
by the prince at Gatchina. Arakcheev speedily won the entire confidence
of Paul by his scrupulous zeal and undeniable technical ability. His
inexorable discipline (magnified into cruelty by later legends) soon
made the Gatchina corps a model for the rest of the Russian army. On the
accession of Paul to the throne Arakcheev was promptly summoned to St
Petersburg, appointed military commandant in the capital, and
major-general in the grenadier battalion of the Preobrazhenskoe Guard.
On the 12th of December 1796, he received the ribbon of St Anne and a
rich estate at Gruzina in the government of Novgorod, the only
substantial gift ever accepted by him during the whole of his career. At
the coronation (5th of April 1797) Paul created him a baron, and he was
subsequently made quartermaster-general and colonel of the whole
Preobrazhenskoe Guard. It was to Arakcheev that Paul entrusted the
reorganization of the army, which during the latter days of Catherine
had fallen into a state of disorder and demoralization. Arakcheev
remorselessly applied the iron Gatchina discipline to the whole of the
imperial forces, beginning with the Guards. He soon became generally
detested by the army, but pursued his course unflinchingly and
introduced many indispensable hygienic reforms. "Clean barracks are
healthy barracks," was his motto. Nevertheless, the opposition of the
officers proved too strong for him, and on the 18th of March 1798 he was
dismissed from all his appointments. Arakcheev's first disgrace only
lasted six months. On the 11th of August he was received back into
favour, speedily reinstated in all his former offices, and on the 5th of
May 1799 was created a count, the emperor himself selecting the motto:
"Devoted, not servile." Five months later he was again in disgrace, the
emperor dismissing him on the strength of a denunciation subsequently
proved to be false. It was a fatal step on Paul's part, for everything
goes to prove that he would never have been assassinated had Arakcheev
continued by his side. During the earlier years of Alexander, Arakcheev
was completely overlooked. Only on the 27th of April 1803, was the count
recalled to St Petersburg, and employed as inspector-general of the
artillery. His wise and thorough reorganization of the whole department
contributed essentially to the victories of the Russians during the
Napoleonic wars. All critics agree, indeed, that the Arakcheev
administration was the golden era of the Russian artillery. The activity
of the inexhaustible inspector knew no bounds, and he neglected nothing
which could possibly improve this arm. His principal reforms were the
subdivision of the artillery divisions into separate independent units,
the formation of artillery brigades, the establishment of a committee of
instruction (1808), and the publishing of an _Artillery Journal_. At
Austerlitz he had the satisfaction of witnessing the actual results of
his artillery reforms. The commissariat scandals which came to light
after the peace of Tilsit convinced the emperor that nothing short of
the stern and incorruptible energy of Arakcheev could reach the sources
of the evil, and in January 1808 he was appointed inspector-general and
war minister. When, on the outbreak of the Swedish war of 1809, the
emperor ordered the army to take advantage of an unusually severe frost
and cross the ice of the Gulf of Finland, it was only the presence of
Arakcheev that compelled an unwilling general and a semi-mutinous army
to begin a campaign which ended in the conquest of Finland. On the
institution of the "Imperial Council" (1st of January 1810), Arakcheev
was made a member of the council of ministers and a senator, while still
retaining the war office. Subsequently Alexander was alienated from him
owing to the intrigues of the count's enemies, who hated him for his
severity and regarded him as a dangerous reactionary. The alienation was
not, however, for long. It is true, Arakcheev took no active part in the
war of 1812, but all the correspondence and despatches relating to it
passed through his hands, and he was the emperor's inseparable companion
during the whole course of it. At Paris (31st of March 1814) Alexander,
with his own hand, wrote the _ukaz_ appointing him a field-marshal, but
he refused the dignity, accepting, instead, a miniature portrait of his
master. From this time Alexander's confidence in Arakcheev steadily
increased, and the emperor imparted to him, first of all, his many
projects of reform, especially his project of military colonies, the
carrying out of the details of which was committed to Arakcheev (1824).
The failure of the scheme was due not to any fault of the count, but to
the inefficiency and insubordination of the district officers. In
Alexander's last years Arakcheev was not merely his chief counsellor,
but his dearest friend, to whom he submitted all his projects for
consideration and revision. The most interesting of these projects was
the plan for the emancipation of the peasantry (1818). On the accession
of Nicholas I., Arakcheev, thoroughly broken in health, gradually
restricted his immense sphere of activity, and on the 26th of April
1826, resigned all his offices and retired to Carlsbad. The 50,000
roubles presented to him by the emperor as a parting gift he at once
handed to the Pavlovsk Institute for the education of the daughters of
poor gentlemen. His last days he spent on his estate at Gruzina,
carefully collecting all his memorials of Alexander, whose memory he
most piously cherished. He also set aside 25,000 roubles for the author
of the best biography of his imperial friend. Arakcheev died on the 21st
of April 1834, with his eyes fixed to the last on the late emperor's
portrait. "I have now done everything," he said, "so I can go and make
my report to the emperor Alexander." In 1806 he had married Natalia
Khomutova, but they lived apart, and he had no children by her.

  See Vasily Ratch, _Memorials of Count Arakcheev_ (Rus.) (St
  Petersburg, 1864); Mikhail Ivanovich Semevsky, _Count Arakcheev and
  the Military Colonies_ (Rus.) (St Petersburg, 1871); Theodor
  Schiemann, _Gesch. Russland's unter Kaiser Nikolaus I._, vol. i.,
  _Alexander I._, &c. (Berlin, 1904).     (R. N. B.)