ARAL, a lake or inland sea in the west of Asia, situated between lat.
43° 30' and 46° 51' N., and long. 58° 13' and 61° 56' E. It was known to
the ancient Arab and Persian geographers as the Sea of Khwarizm or
Kharezm, from the neighbouring district of the Chorasmians, and derives
its present name from the Kirghiz designation of Aral-denghiz, or Sea of
Islands. In virtue of its area (26,233 sq. m.) it is the fourth largest
inland sea of the world. It has nearly the same length as width, namely
about 170 m., if its northern gulf (Kichkineh-denghiz) is left out of
account. Its depth is insignificant, the maximum being 220 ft. in a
depression in the north-west, and the mean depth only 50 ft., so that
notwithstanding its area it contains only eleven times as much water as
the Lake of Geneva. Its altitude is 242½ ft. above the Caspian, i.e.
about 155 ft. above the ocean. The lake is surrounded on the north by
steppes; on the west by the rocky plateau of Ust-Urt, which separates it
from the Caspian; on the south by the alluvial district of Khiva; and on
the east by the Kyzyl-kum, or Red Sand Desert. On the north the shores
are comparatively low, and the coast-line is broken by a number of
irregular bays, of which the most important are those of Sary-chaganak
and Paskevich. On the west an almost unbroken wall of rock extends from
Chernychev Bay southwards, rising towards the middle to 500 ft. The
southern coast is occupied by the delta of the Oxus (Jihun, Amu-darya),
one of the arms of which, the Laudan, forms a swamp, 80 m. long and 20
broad, before it discharges into the sea. The only other tributary of
any size that the sea receives is the Jaxartes (Sihun, Syr-darya) which
enters towards the northern extremity of the east coast, and is
suspected to be shifting its embouchure more and more to the north. This
river, as well as the Amu, conveys vast quantities of sediment into the
lake; the delta of the Syr-darya increased by 13¾ sq. m. between 1847
and 1900. The eastern coast is fringed with multitudes of small islands,
and other islands, some of considerable size, are situated in the open
towards the north and west. Kug-Aral, the largest, lies opposite the
mouth of the Syr-darya, cutting off the Kichkineh-denghiz or Little Sea.
The next largest island is the Nikolai, nearly in the middle. Navigation
is dangerous owing to the frequency and violence of the storms, and the
almost total absence of shelter. The north-east wind is the most
prevalent, and sometimes blows for months together. The only other
craft, except the steamships of the Russians, that venture on the
waters, are the flat-bottomed boats of the Kirghiz.

In regard to the period of the formation of the Aral there were formerly
two theories. According to Sir H.C. Rawlinson (_Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc._,
March 1867) the disturbances which produced the present lake took place
in the course of the middle ages; while Sir Roderick Murchison contended
(_Journ. of Roy. Geog. Soc._, 1867, p. cxliv. &c.) that the Caspian and
Aral existed as separate seas before and during all the historic period,
and that the main course of the rivers Jaxartes and Oxus was determined
in a prehistoric era. The former based his opinion largely on historical
evidence, and the latter trusted principally to geological data. There
is no doubt that in recent historical times Lake Aral had a much greater
extension than it has at the present time, and that its area is now
diminishing. This is, of course, due to the excess of evaporation over
the amount of water supplied by its two feeders, the Amu-darya and the
Syr-darya, both of which are seriously drawn upon for irrigation in all
the oases they flow through. Old shore lines and other indications point
to the level of the lake having once been 50 ft. above the existing
level. Nevertheless the general desiccation is subject to temporary
fluctuations, which appear to correspond to the periods recently
suggested by Eduard Brückner (b. 1862); for, whereas the lake diminished
and shrank during 1850-1880, since the latter year it has been rising
again. Islands which were formerly connected with the shore are now some
distance away from it and entirely surrounded by water. Moreover, on a
graduated level, put down in 1874, there was a permanent rise of nearly
4 ft. by 1901. The temperature at the bottom was found (1900-1902) by
Emil Berg to be 33.8° Fahr., while that of the surface varied from 44.5°
to 80.5° between May and September; the mean surface temperature for
July was 75°. The salinity of the water is much less than that of the
ocean, containing only 1.05% of salt, and the lake freezes every year
for a great distance from its shores. The opinion that Lake Aral
periodically disappeared, which was for a long time countenanced by
Western geographers, loses more and more probability now that it is
evident that at a relatively recent period the Caspian Sea extended much
farther eastward than it does now, and that Lake Aral communicated with
it through the Sary-kamysh depression. The present writer is even
inclined to think that, besides this southern communication with the
Caspian, Lake Aral may have been, even in historical times, connected
with the Mortvyi Kultuk (Tsarevich) Gulf of the Caspian, discharging
part of its water into that sea through a depression of the Ust-Urt
plateau, which is marked by a chain of lakes (Chumyshty, Asmantai). In
this case it might have been easily confounded with a gulf of the
Caspian (as by Jenkinson). That the level of Lake Aral was much higher
in post-Pliocene times is proved by the discovery of shells of its
characteristic species of _Pecten_ and _Mytilus_ in the Kara-kum Desert,
33 m. south of the lake and at an altitude of 70 ft. above its present
level, and perhaps even up to 200 ft. (by Syevertsov).

The fish of Lake Aral belong to fresh-water species, and in some of its
rapid tributaries the interesting _Scaphirhynchus_, which represents a
survival from the Tertiary epoch, is found. The fishing is very
productive, the fish being exported to Turkestan, Merv and Russia. The
shores of the lake are uninhabited; the nearest settlements are Kazala,
55 m. east, on the Syr, and Chimbai and Kungrad in the delta of the Amu.

  AUTHORITIES.--Makshéev's "Description of Lake Aral," and Kaulbars'
  "Delta of the Amu," in _Zapiski of Russ. Geogr. Soc._, 1st series, v.,
  and new series, ix.; _Grimm's Studies of the Aral-Caspian Expedition_;
  Nikolsky's "Fishing in Lake Aral," in _Izvestia, Russ. Geogr. Soc._,
  1887; Prof. Mushketov, _Turkestan_, vol. i. (1886), which contains
  bibliographical references; Rösler, _Die Aralseefrage_ (1873); Wood,
  _The Shores of the Aral Lake_ (1876); and Berg in _Izvestia, Turkestan
  Branch of Russian Geog. Soc._ (vol. iii., Tashkent, 1902).
       (P. A. K.)
