ARAM, EUGENE (1704-1759), English scholar, but more famous as the
murderer celebrated by Hood in his ballad, the _Dream of Eugene Aram_,
and by Bulwer Lytton in his romance of _Eugene Aram_, was born of humble
parents at Ramsgill, Yorkshire, in 1704. He received little education at
school, but manifested an intense desire for learning. While still
young, he married and settled as a schoolmaster at Netherdale, and
during the years he spent there, he taught himself both Latin and Greek.
In 1734 he removed to Knaresborough, where he remained as schoolmaster
till 1745. In that year a man named Daniel Clark, an intimate friend of
Aram, after obtaining a considerable quantity of goods from some of the
tradesmen in the town, suddenly disappeared. Suspicions of being
concerned in this swindling transaction fell upon Aram. His garden was
searched, and some of the goods found there. As, however, there was not
evidence sufficient to convict him of any crime, he was discharged, and
soon after set out for London, leaving his wife behind. For several
years he travelled through parts of England, acting as usher in a number
of schools, and settled finally at Lynn, in Norfolk. During his travels
he had amassed considerable materials for a work he had projected on
etymology, to be entitled a _Comparative Lexicon of the English, Latin,
Greek, Hebrew and Celtic Languages_. He was undoubtedly an original
philologist, who realized, what was then not yet admitted by scholars,
the affinity of the Celtic language to the other languages of Europe,
and could dispute the then accepted belief that Latin was derived from
Greek. Aram's writings show that he had grasped the right idea on the
subject of the Indo-European character of the Celtic language, which was
not established till J.C. Prichard published his book, _Eastern Origin
of the Celtic Nations_, in 1831. But he was not destined to live in
history as the pioneer of a new philology. In February 1758 a skeleton
was dug up at Knaresborough, and some suspicion arose that it might be
Clark's. Aram's wife had more than once hinted that her husband and a
man named Houseman knew the secret of Clark's disappearance. Houseman
was at once arrested and confronted with the bones that had been found.
He affirmed his innocence, and, taking up one of the bones, said, "This
is no more Dan Clark's bone than it is mine." His manner in saying this
roused suspicion that he knew more of Clark's disappearance than he was
willing to admit. He was again examined, and confessed that he had been
present at the murder of Clark by Aram and another man, Terry, of whom
nothing further is heard. He also gave information as to the place where
the body had been buried in St Robert's Cave, a well-known spot near
Knaresborough. A skeleton was dug up here, and Aram was immediately
arrested, and sent to York for trial. Houseman was admitted as evidence
against him. Aram conducted his own defence, and did not attempt to
overthrow Houseman's evidence, although there were some discrepancies in
that; but made a skilful attack on the fallibility of circumstantial
evidence in general, and particularly of evidence drawn from the
discovery of bones. He brought forward several instances where bones had
been found in caves, and tried to show that the bones found in St
Robert's Cave were probably those of some hermit who had taken up his
abode there. He was found guilty, and condemned to be executed on the
6th of August 1759, three days after his trial. While in his cell he
confessed his guilt, and threw some light on the motives for his crime,
by asserting that he had discovered a criminal intimacy between Clark
and his own wife. On the night before his execution he made an
unsuccessful attempt at suicide by opening the veins in his arm.