ARANDA, PEDRO PABLO ABARCA DE BOLEA, COUNT OF (1719-1798), Spanish
minister and general, was born at the castle of Siétamo, a lordship of
his family near Huesca in Aragon, on the 1st of August 1719. The house
of Abarca was very ancient, a fact of which Don Pedro, who never forgot
that he was a "rico hombre" (noble) of Aragon, was deeply conscious. He
was educated partly at Bologna and partly at the military school of
Parma. In 1740 he entered the army as captain in the regiment
"Castilla," of which his father was proprietary colonel. On the death of
his father he became colonel, and served in the Italian campaigns of the
War of the Austrian Succession. In 1749 he married Doña Ana, daughter of
the 9th duke of Hijar, by whom he had one son, who died young, and a
daughter. During the following years he travelled and visited the camp
of Frederick the Great, whose system of drill he admired and afterwards
introduced into the Spanish army. After a short period of diplomatic
service in Portugal, where his exacting temper made it impossible for
him to agree with the premier, Pombal, he returned to Madrid, was made a
knight of the Golden Fleece, and director-general of artillery--a post
which he threw up, together with his rank of lieutenant-general, because
he was not allowed to punish certain fraudulent contractors. The king,
Ferdinand VI., exiled him to his estates, but Charles III. on his
accession took him into favour. He was again employed in diplomacy, and
then appointed to command an army against Portugal in 1763. In 1764 he
was made governor of Valencia. When in 1766 the king was driven from his
capital in a riot, he summoned Aranda to Madrid and made him president
of the council, and captain-general of New Castile. Until 1773 Aranda
was the most important minister in Spain. He restored order and aided
the king most materially in his work of administrative reform. But his
great achievements, which gave him a high reputation throughout Europe
with the philosophical and anti-clerical parties, were his expulsion of
the Jesuits, whom the king considered responsible for the riot of 1766,
and the active part he took in the suppression of the order. Aranda had
come much under foreign influence by his education and his travels, and
had acquired the reputation of being a confirmed sceptic. By Voltaire
and the Encyclopaedists he was erected into a hero from whom great
things were expected. His ability, his remarkable capacity for work,
and his popularity made him indispensable to the king. But he was a
trying servant, for his temper was captious and his tongue sarcastic,
while his aristocratic arrogance led him to display an offensive
contempt for the _golillas_ (the stiff collars), as he called the
lawyers and public servants whom the king preferred to choose as
ministers, and he permitted himself an amazing freedom of language with
his sovereign. At last Charles III. sent him as ambassador to Paris in a
disguised disgrace. Aranda held this position till 1787, but in Paris he
was chiefly known for his oddities of manner and for perpetual wrangling
with the French on small points of etiquette. He resigned his post for
private reasons. In the reign of Charles IV., with whom he had been on
familiar terms during the life of the old king, he was for a very short
time prime minister in 1792. In reality he was merely used as a screen
by the queen Maria Louisa and her favourite Godoy. His open sympathy
with the French Revolution brought him into collision with the violent
reaction produced in Spain by the excesses of the Jacobins, while his
temper, which had become perfectly uncontrollable with age, made him
insufferable to the king. After his removal from office he was
imprisoned for a short time at Granada, and was threatened with a trial
by the Inquisition. The proceedings did not go beyond the preliminary
stage, and Aranda died at Epila on the 9th of January 1798.

  See Don Jacobo de la Pezuela in the _Revista de España_, vol. xxv.
  (1872); Don Antonio Ma. Fabié, in the _Diccionario general de politica
  y administration_ of Don E. Suarez Inclan (Madrid, 1868), vol. i.; M.
  Morel Fatio, _Études sur l'Espagne_ (2nd series, Paris, 1890).
       (D. H.)