ARANJUEZ (perhaps the ancient _Ara Jovis_), a town of central Spain, in
the province of Madrid, 30 m. S. of Madrid, on the left bank of the
river Tagus, at the junction of the main southern railways to Madrid,
and at the western terminus of the Aranjuez-Cuenca railway. Pop. (1900)
12,670. Aranjuez occupies part of a wide valley, about 1500 ft. above
the sea. Its formal, straight streets, crossing one another regularly at
right angles, and its uniform, two-storeyed houses were built in
imitation of the Dutch style, under the direction of Jerónimo, marquis
de Grimaldi (1716-1788), ambassador of Charles III. at the Hague. A
rapid in the Tagus, artificially converted into a weir, renders
irrigation easy, and has thus created an oasis in the midst of the
barren plateau of New Castile. On every side the town is surrounded by
royal parks and woods of sycamores, plane-trees and elms, often of
extraordinary size. The prevalence of the dark English elms, first
introduced into the country and planted here by order of Philip II.
(1527-1598), gives to the Aranjuez district a character wholly distinct
from that of other Spanish landscapes; and at an early period, despite
the unhealthy climate, and especially the oppressive summer heat, which
often approaches 100° F., Aranjuez became a favourite residence of the
Spanish court. In the 14th and 15th centuries, the master of the Order
of Santiago had a country seat here, which passed, along with the
mastership, into the possession of the crown of Spain in 1522. Its
successive occupants, from the emperor Charles V. (1500-1558) down to
Ferdinand VII. (1784-1833), modified it according to their respective
tastes. The larger palace was built by Pedro Caro for Philip V.
(1683-1746), in the French style of the period. It overlooks the Jardin
de la Isla, a beautiful garden laid out for Philip II. on an island in
the Tagus, which forms the scene of Schiller's famous drama _Don
Carlos_. The Casa del Labrador, or Labourer's Cottage, as it is called,
is a smaller palace built by Charles IV. in 1803, and full of elaborate
ornamentation. The chief local industry is farming, and an annual fair
is held in September for the sale of live stock. Great attention is
given to the rearing of horses and mules, and the royal stud used to be
remarkable for the beauty of its cream-coloured breed. The treaty of
1772 between France and Spain was concluded at Aranjuez, which
afterwards suffered severely from the French during the Peninsular War.
Here, also, in 1808, the insurrection broke out which ended in the
abdication of Charles IV.

  For a fuller description of Aranjuez see D.S. Viñas y Rey, _Aranjuez_
  (Madrid, 1890); F. Nard, _Guia de Aranjuez, su historia y descripcion_
  (Madrid, 1851), (illustrated); Alvarez de Quindos, _Descripcion
  historica del real basque y casa de Aranjuez_ (Madrid, 1804).