ARANY, JÁNOS (1817-1882), the greatest poet of Hungary after Petöfi, was
born at Nagy-Szalontá on the 2nd of March 1817, the son of György Arany
and Sara Mégyeri; his people were small Calvinist yeomen of noble
origin, whose property consisted of a rush-thatched cottage and a tiny
plot of land. An only son, late born, seeing no companions of his own
age, hearing nothing but the voices of his parents and the hymns and
prayers in the little Calvinist chapel, Arany grew up a grave and
gentle, but by no means an ignorant child. His precocity was remarkable.
At six years of age he went to school at Szalontá, where he read
everything he could lay his hands upon in Hungarian and Latin. From 1832
to 1836 Arany was a preceptor at Kis-Ujszállás and Debreczen, still a
voracious reader with a wider field before him, for he had by this time
taught himself French and German. Tiring of the monotony of a scholastic
life, he joined a troupe of travelling actors. The hardships he suffered
were as nothing compared with the pangs of conscience which plagued him
when he thought of the despair of his father, who had meant to make a
pastor of this prodigal son, to whom both church and college now seemed
for ever closed. At last he borrowed sixpence from the stage-manager and
returned home, carrying all his property tied up in a handkerchief.
Shortly after his home-coming his mother died and his father became
stone-blind. Arany at once resolved that it was his duty never to leave
his father again, and a conrectorship which he obtained at this time
enabled them to live in modest comfort. In 1840 he obtained a notaryship
also, and the same year married Juliana Ercsey, the penniless orphan
daughter of an advocate. The next few happy years were devoted to his
profession and a good deal of miscellaneous reading, especially of
Shakespeare (he learnt English in order to compare the original with his
well-thumbed German version) and Homer. Meanwhile the reactionaries of
Vienna were goading the Magyar Liberals into revolt, and Arany found a
safety-valve for his growing indignation by composing a satirical poem
in hexameters, entitled "The Lost Constitution." The Kisfaludy Society,
the great literary association of Hungary, about this time happened to
advertise a prize for the best satire on current events. Arany sent in
his work, and shortly afterwards was awarded the 25-gulden prize (7th of
February 1846) by the society, which then advertised another prize for
the best Magyar epic poem. Arany won this also with his _Toldi_ (the
first part of the present trilogy), and immediately found himself
famous. All eyes were instantly turned towards the poor country notary,
and Petöfi was the first to greet him as a brother. In February of the
following year Arany was elected a member of the Kisfaludy Society. In
the memorable year 1848 the people of Szalontá elected him their deputy
to the Hungarian parliament. But neither now nor subsequently (1861,
1869) would he accept a parliamentary mandate. He wrote many articles,
however, in the gazette _Népbarátja_, an organ of the Magyar government,
and served in the field as a national guard for eight or ten weeks. In
1849 he was in the civil service of the revolutionary government, and
after the final catastrophe returned to his native place, living as best
he could on his small savings till 1850, when Lajos Tisza, the father of
Kálmán Tisza, the future prime minister, invited him to his castle at
Geszt to teach his son Domokos the art of poetry. In the following year
Arany was elected professor of Hungarian literature and language at the
Nagy-Körös gymnasium. He also attempted to write another epic poem, but
the time was not favourable for such an undertaking. The miserable
condition of his country, and his own very precarious situation, weighed
heavily upon his sensitive soul, and he suffered severely both in mind
and body. On the other hand reflection on past events made clear to him
not only the sufferings but the defects and follies of the national
heroes, and from henceforth, for the first time, we notice a bitterly
humorous vein in his writings. Thus _Bolond Istók_, the first canto of
which he completed in 1850, is full of sub-acrid merriment. During his
nine years' residence at Nagy-Körös, Arany first seriously turned his
attention to the Magyar ballad, and not only composed some of the most
beautiful ballads in the language, but wrote two priceless dissertations
on the technique of the ballad in general: "Something concerning
assonance" (1854), and "On Hungarian National Versification" (1856).

When the Hungarian Academy opened its doors again after a ten years'
cessation, Arany was elected a member (15th of December 1858). On the
15th of July 1860 he was elected director of the revived Kisfaludy
Society, and went to Pest. In November, the same year, he started
_Szépirodalmi Figyelö_, a monthly review better known by its later name,
_Koszeru_, which did much for Magyar criticism and literature. He also
edited the principal publications of the society, including its notable
translation of _Shakespeare's Dramatic Works_, to which he contributed
the _Midsummer Night's Dream_ (1864), _Hamlet_ and _King John_ (1867).
The same year he won the Nádasdy prize of the Academy with his poem
"Death of Buda." From 1865 to 1879 he was the secretary of the Hungarian
Academy.

Domestic affliction, ill-health and his official duties made these years
comparatively unproductive, but he issued an edition of his collected
poems in 1867, and in 1880 won the Karácsonyi prize with his translation
of the _Comedies of Aristophanes_ (1880). In 1879 he completed his epic
trilogy by publishing _The Love of Toldi_ and _Toldi's Evening_, which
were received with universal enthusiasm. He died suddenly on the 24th of
October 1882. The first edition of his collected works, in 8 volumes,
was published in 1884-1885.

Arany reformed Hungarian literature. Hitherto classical and romantic
successively, like other European literatures, he first gave it a
national direction. He compelled the poetry of art to draw nearer to
life and nature, extended its boundaries and made it more generally
intelligible and popular. He wrote not for one class or school but for
the whole nation. He introduced the popular element into literature, but
at the same time elevated and ennobled it. What Petöfi had done for
lyrical he did for epic poetry. Yet there were great differences between
them. Petöfi was more subjective, more individual; Arany was more
objective and national. As a lyric poet Petöfi naturally gave expression
to present moods and feelings; as an epic poet Arany plunged into the
past. He took his standpoint on tradition. His art was essentially
rooted in the character of the whole nation and its glorious history.
His genius was unusually rich and versatile; his artistic conscience
always alert and sober. His taste was extraordinarily developed and
absolutely sure. To say nothing of his other great qualities, he is
certainly the most artistic of all the Magyar poets.

  See _Posthumous Writings and Correspondence of Arany_, edited by
  László Arany (Hung.), (Budapest, 1887-1889); article "Arany," in _A
  Pallas Nagy Lexikona_, Kot 2 (Budapest, 1893); Mór Gaal, _Life of
  János Arany_ (Hung.), (Budapest, 1898); L. Gyöngyösi, _János Arany's
  Life and Works_ (Hung.), (Budapest, 1901). Translations from Arany:
  _The Legend of the Wondrous Hunt_ (canto 6 of _Buda's Death_), by D.
  Butler (London, 1881); _Toldi, poème en 12 chants_ (Paris, 1895);
  _Dichtungen_ (Leipzig, 1880); _Konig Buda's Tod_ (Leipzig, 1879);
  _Balladen_ (Vienna, 1886).     (R. N. B.)