ARARAT (Armen. _Massis_, Turk. _Egri Dagh_, i.e. "Painful Mountain,"
Pers. _Koh-i-Nuh_, i.e. "Mountain of Noah,"), the name given to the
culminating point of the Armenian plateau which rises to a height of
17,000 ft. above the sea. The _massif_ of Ararat rises on the north and
east out of the alluvial plain of the Aras, here from 2500 ft. to 3000
ft. above the sea, and on the south-west sinks into the plateau of
Bayezid, about 4500 ft. It is thus isolated on all sides but the
north-west, where a _col_ about 6900 ft. high connects it with a long
ridge of volcanic mountains. Out of the _massif_ rise two peaks, "their
bases confluent at a height of 8800 ft., their summits about 7 m.
apart." The higher, Great Ararat, is "a huge broad-shouldered mass, more
of a dome than a cone"; the lower, Little Ararat, 12,840 ft. on which
the territories of the tsar, the sultan, and the shah meet, is "an
elegant cone or pyramid, rising with steep, smooth, regular sides into a
comparatively sharp peak" (Bryce). On the north and west the slopes of
Great Ararat are covered with glittering fields of unbroken _névé_. The
only true glacier is on the north-east side, at the bottom of a large
chasm which runs into the heart of the mountain. The great height of the
snow-line, 14,000 ft., is due to the small rainfall and the upward rush
of dry air from the plain of the Araxes. The middle zone of Ararat,
5000-11,500 ft., is covered with good pasture, the upper and lower zones
are for the most part sterile. Whether the tradition which makes Ararat
the resting-place of Noah's Ark is of any historical value or not, there
is at least poetical fitness in the hypothesis, inasmuch as this
mountain is about equally distant from the Black Sea and the Caspian,
from the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. Another tradition--accepted
by the Kurds, Syrians and Nestorians--fixes on Mount Judi, in the south
of Armenia, on the left bank of the Tigris, near Jezire, as the Ark's
resting-place. There so-called genuine relics of the ark were exhibited,
and a monastery and mosque of commemoration were built; but the
monastery was destroyed by lightning in 776 A.D., and the tradition has
declined in credit. Round Mount Ararat, however, gather many traditions
connected with the Deluge. The garden of Eden is placed in the valley of
the Araxes; Marand is the burial-place of Noah's wife; at Arghuri, a
village near the great chasm, was the spot where Noah planted the first
vineyard, and here were shown Noah's vine and the monastery of St James,
until village and monastery were overwhelmed by a fall of rock, ice and
snow, shaken down by an earthquake in 1840. According to the Babylonian
account, the resting-place of the Ark was "on the Mountain of Nizir,"
which some writers have identified with Mount Rowanduz, and others with
Mount Elburz, near Teheran.

From the Armenian plateau, Ararat rises in a graceful isolated cone far
into the region of perennial snow. It was long believed by the Armenian
monks that no one was permitted to reach the "secret top" of Ararat with
its sacred remains, but on the 27th of September 1829, Dr. Johann Jacob
Parrot (1792-1840) of Dorpat, a German in the employment of Russia, set
foot on the "dome of eternal ice." Ararat has since been ascended by S.
Aftonomov (1834 and 1843); M. Wagner and W.H. Abich (1845); J. Chodzko,
N.W. Chanykov, P.H. Moritz and a party of Cossacks in the service of the
Russian government (1850); Stuart (1856); Monteith (1856); D.W.
Freshfield (1868); James Bryce (1876); A.V. Markov (1888); P. Pashtukhov
and H.B. Lynch (1893). Mr Freshfield thus described the mountain:--"It
stands perfectly isolated from all the other ranges, with the still more
perfect cone of Little Ararat (a typical volcano) at its side. Seen thus
early in the season (May), with at least 9000 ft. of snow on its slopes,
from a distance and height well calculated to permit the eye to take in
its true proportions, we agreed that no single mountain we know
presented such a magnificent and impressive appearance as the Armenian
Giant." There are a number of glaciers in the upper portion, and the
climate of the whole district is very severe. The greater part of the
mountain is destitute of trees, but the lower Ararat is clothed with
birches. The fauna and flora are both comparatively meagre.

Both Great and Little Ararat consist entirely of volcanic rocks, chiefly
andesites and pyroxene andesites, with some obsidian. No crater now
exists at the summit of either, but well-formed parasitic cones occur
upon their flanks. There are no certain historic records of any
eruption. The earthquake and fall of rock which destroyed the village of
Arghuri in 1840 may have been caused by a volcanic explosion, but the
evidence is unsatisfactory.

The name of Ararat also applies to the Assyrian _Urardhu_, the country
in which the Ark rested after the Deluge (Gen. viii. 4), and to which
the murderers of Sennacherib fled (2 Kings xix. 37; Isaiah xxxvii. 38).
The name Urardhu, originally that of a principality which included Mount
Ararat and the plain of the Araxes, is given in Assyrian inscriptions
from the 9th century B.C. downwards to a kingdom that at one time
included the greater part of the later Armenia. The native name of the
kingdom was _Biainas_, and its capital was _Dhuspas_, now Van. The first
king, Sarduris I. (c. 833 B.C.), subdued the country of the Upper
Euphrates and Tigris. His inscriptions are written in cuneiform, in
Assyrian, whilst those of his successors are in cuneiform, in their own
language, which is neither Aryan nor Semitic. The kings of Biainas
extended their kingdom eastward and westward, and defeated the Assyrians
and Hittites. But Sarduris II. was overthrown by Tiglath Pileser III.
(743 B.C.), and driven north of the Araxes, where he made Armavir,
_Armauria_, his capital. Interesting specimens of Biainian art have been
found on the site of the palace of Rusas II., near Van. Shortly after
645 B.C. the kingdom fell, possibly conquered by Cyaxares, and a way was
thus opened for the immigration of the Aryan Armenians. The name Ararat
is unknown to the Armenians of the present day. The limits of the
Biblical Ararat are not known, but they must have included the lofty
Armenian plateau which overlooks the plain of the Araxes on the north,
and that of Mesopotamia on the south. It is only natural that the
highest and most striking mountain in the district should have been
regarded as that upon which the Ark rested, and that the old name of the
country should have been transferred to it.

  See also H.B. Lynch, _Armenia_ (1901); Sayce, "Cuneiform Inscriptions
  of Lake Van," in _Journal of Royal Asiatic Society_, vols. xiv., xx.
  and xxvi.; Maspero, _Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient
  classique_, tome iii., _Les Empires_ (Paris, 1899); J. Bryce,
  _Transcaucasia and Ararat_ (4th ed., 1896); D.W. Freshfield, _Travels
  in the Central Caucasus and Bashan_ (1869); Parrot, _Reise zum Ararat_
  (1834); Wagner, _Reise nach dem Ararat_ (1848); Abich, _Die Besteigung
  des Ararat_ (1849); articles "Ararat," in Hastings' _Dictionary of the
  Bible_, and the _Encyclopaedia Biblica_.     (C. W. W.)