ARAROBA POWDER, a drug occurring in the form of a yellowish-brown
powder, varying considerably in tint, which derives an alternative
name--Goa powder--from the Portuguese colony of Goa, where it appears to
have been introduced about the year 1852. The tree which yields it is
the _Andira Araroba_ of the natural order Leguminosae. It is met with in
great abundance in certain forests in the province of Bahia, preferring
as a rule low and humid spots. The tree is from 80 to 100 ft. high and
has large imparipinnate leaves, the leaflets of which are oblong, about
1½ in. long and ¾ in. broad, and somewhat truncate at the apex. The
flowers are papilionaceous, of a purple colour and arranged in panicles.
The Goa powder or araroba is contained in the trunk, filling crevices in
the heartwood. It is a morbid product in the tree, and yields to hot
chloroform 50% of a substance known officially as chrysarobin, which has
a definite therapeutic value and is contained in most modern
pharmacopoeias. It occurs as a micro-crystalline, odourless, tasteless
powder, very slightly soluble in either water or alcohol; it also occurs
in rhubarb root. This complex mixture contains pure chrysarobin
(C15H12O3), di-chrysarobin methylether (C30H23O7·OCH3), di-chrysarobin
(C30H24O7). Chrysarobin is a methyl trioxyanthracene and exists as a
glucoside in the plant, but is gradually oxidized to chrysophanic acid
(a dioxy-methyl anthraquinone) and glucose. This strikes a blood-red
colour in alkaline solutions, and may therefore cause much alarm if
administered to a patient whose urine is alkaline. The British
pharmacopoeia has an ointment containing one part of chrysarobin and 24
of benzoated lard.

Both internally and externally the drug is a powerful irritant. The
general practice amongst modern dermatologists is to use only
chrysophanic acid, which may be applied externally and given by the
mouth in doses of about one grain in cases of psoriasis and chronic
eczema. The drug is a feeble parasiticide, and has been used locally in
the treatment of ringworm. It stains the skin--and linen--a deep yellow
or brown, a coloration which may be removed by caustic alkali in weak
solution.