ARATUS, Greek statesman, was born at Sicyon in 271 B.C., and educated at
Argos after the death of his father, at the hands of Abantidas, tyrant
of Sicyon. When twenty years old Aratus delivered Sicyon from its tyrant
by a bold _coup de main_. By enrolling it in the Achaean League (q.v.)
he secured it against Macedonia, and with funds received from Ptolemy
Philadelphus he pacified the returned exiles. Ever anxious to extend the
league, in which after 245 he was general almost every second year,
Aratus took Corinth by surprise (243), and with mingled threats and
persuasion won over other cities, notably Megalopolis (233) and Argos
(229), whose tyrants abdicated voluntarily. He fought successfully
against the Aetolians (241), and in 228 induced the Macedonian commander
to evacuate Attica. But when Cleomenes III. (q.v.) opened hostilities,
Aratus sustained several reverses, and was badly defeated near Dyme (226
or 225). Rather than admit Cleomenes as chief of the league, where he
might have upset the existing timocracy, Aratus opposed all attempts at
mediation. As plenipotentiary in 224 he called in Antigonus Doson of
Macedonia, and helped to recover Corinth and Argos and to crush
Cleomenes at Sellasia, but at the same time sacrificed the independence
of the league. In 220-219 the Aetolians defeated him in Arcadia and
harried the Peloponnese unchecked. When Philip V. of Macedon came to
expel these marauders, Aratus became the king's adviser, and averted a
treacherous attack on Messene (215); before long, however, he lost
favour and in 213 was poisoned. The Sicyonians accorded him hero-worship
as a "son of Asclepius." To Aratus is due the credit of having made the
Achaean League an effective instrument against tyrants and foreign
enemies. But his military incapacity and his blind hatred of democratic
reform went far to undo his work.

  Polybius (ii.-viii.) follows the _Memoirs_ which Aratus wrote to
  justify his statesmanship,--Plutarch (_Aratus_ and _Cleomenes_) used
  this same source and the hostile account of Phylarchus; Paus. ii. 10;
  see Neumeyer, _Aralos von Sikyon_ (Leipzig, 1886).     (M. O. B. C.)