ARAUCARIA, a genus of coniferous trees included in the tribe
_Araucarineae_. They are magnificent evergreen trees, with apparently
whorled branches, and stiff, flattened, pointed leaves, found in Brazil
and Chile, Polynesia and Australia. The name of the genus is derived
from Arauco, the name of the district in southern Chile where the trees
were first discovered. _Araucaria imbricata_, the Chile pine, or "monkey
puzzle," was introduced into Britain in 1796. It is largely cultivated,
and usually stands the winter of Britain; but in some years, when the
temperature fell very low, the trees have suffered much. Care should be
taken in planting to select a spot somewhat elevated and well drained.
The tree grows to the height of 150 ft. in the Cordilleras of Chile. The
cones are from 8 to 8½ in. broad, and 7 to 7½ in. long. The wood of the
tree is hard and durable. This is the only species which can be
cultivated in the open air in Britain. _Araucaria brasiliana_, the
Brazil pine, is a native of the mountains of southern Brazil, and was
introduced into Britain in 1819. It is not so hardy as _A. imbricata_,
and requires protection during winter. It is grown in conservatories for
half-hardy plants. _Araucaria excelsa_, the Norfolk Island pine, a
native of Norfolk Island and New Caledonia, was discovered during
Captain Cook's second voyage, and introduced into Britain by Sir Joseph
Banks in 1793. It cannot be grown in the open air in Britain, as it
requires protection from frost, and is more tender than the Brazilian
pine. It is a majestic tree, sometimes attaining a height of more than
220 ft. The scales of its cones are winged, and have a hook at the apex.
_Araucaria Cunninghami_, the Moreton Bay pine, is a tall tree abundant
on the shores of Moreton Bay, Australia, and found through the littoral
region of Queensland to Cape York Peninsula, also in New Guinea. It
requires protection in England during the winter. _Araucaria Bidwilli_,
the Bunya-Bunya pine, found on the mountains of southern Queensland,
between the rivers Brisbane and Burnett, at 27° S. lat., is a noble
tree, attaining a height of 100 to 150 ft., with a straight trunk and
white wood. It bears cones as large as a man's head. Its seeds are very
large, and are used as food by the natives. _Araucaria Rulei_, which is
a tree of New Caledonia, attains a height of 50 or 60 ft. _Araucaria
Cookii_, also a native of New Caledonia, attains a height of 150 ft. It
is found also in the Isle of Pines, and in the New Hebrides. The tree
has a remarkable appearance, due to shedding its primary branches for
about five-sixths of its height and replacing them by a small bushy
growth, the whole resembling a tall column crowned with foliage,
suggesting to its discoverer, Captain Cook, a tall column of basalt.