ARAUCANIANS (or AUCA), a tribal group of South American Indians in
southern Chile (see above). Physically a fine race, their hardiness and
bravery enabled them successfully to resist the Incas in the 15th
century. Their government was by four _toquis_ or princes, independent
of one another, but confederates against foreign enemies. Each tetrarchy
was divided into five provinces, ruled by five chiefs called
_apo-ulmen_; and each province into nine districts, governed by as many
_ulmen_, who were subject to the apo-ulmen, as the latter were to the
toquis. These various chiefs (who all bore the title of ulmen) composed
the aristocracy of the country. They held their dignities by hereditary
descent in the male line, and in the order of primogeniture. The supreme
power of each tetrarchy resided in a council of the ulmen, who assembled
annually in a large plain. The resolutions of this council were subject
to popular assent. The chiefs, indeed, were little more than leaders in
war; for the right of private revenge limited their authority in
judicial matters; and they received no taxes. Their laws were merely
traditional customs. War was declared by the council, messengers bearing
arrows dipped in blood being sent to all parts of the country to summon
the men to arms. From the time of the first Spanish invasion (1535) the
Araucanians made a vigorous resistance, and after worsting the best
soldiers and the best generals of Spain for two centuries obtained an
acknowledgment of their independence. Their success was due as much to
their readiness in adopting their enemy's methods of warfare as to their
bravery. Realizing the inefficiency of their old missiles when opposed
to musket balls, they laid aside their bows, and armed themselves with
spears, swords or other weapons fitted for close combat. Their practice
was to advance rapidly within such a distance of the Spaniards as would
not leave the latter time to reload after firing. Here they received
without shrinking a volley, which was certain to destroy a number of
them, and then rushing forward in close order, fought their enemies hand
to hand.

The Araucanians believe in a supreme being, and in many subordinate
spirits, good and bad. They believe also in omens and divination, but
they have neither temples nor idols, nor religious rites. Very few have
become Roman Catholics. They believe in a future state, and have a
confused tradition respecting a deluge, from which some persons were
saved on a high mountain. They divide the year into twelve months of
thirty days, and add five days by intercalation. They esteem poetry and
eloquence, but can scarcely be induced to learn reading or writing.

The tribal divisions have little or no organization. Some 50,000 in
number, they spend a nomad existence wandering from pasture to pasture,
living in low skin tents, their herds providing their food. They still
preserve their warlike nature, though in 1870 they formally recognized
Chilean rule. In 1861 Antoine de Tounens (1820-1878), a French
adventurer in Chile, proclaimed himself king of Araucania under the
title of Orélie Antoine I., and tried to obtain subscriptions from
France to support his enterprise. But his pretensions were ludicrous; he
was quickly captured by the Chileans and sent back to France (1862) as a
madman; and though he made one more abortive effort in 1874 to recover
his "kingdom," and occupied his pen in magnifying his achievements,
nobody took him seriously except a few of the deluded Indians.

  See Domeyko, _Araucania y sus habitantes_ (Santiago, 1846); de Ginoux,
  "Le Chili et les Araucans," in _Bull, de la soc, de géogr._ (1852);
  E.R. Smith, _Araucamans_ (New York, 1855); J.T. Medina, _Los aborjenes
  de Chile_ (Santiago, 1882); A. Polakowsky, _Die heutigen Araukanen_,
  Globus No. 74 (Brunswick, 1898).