ARAVALLI HILLS, a range of mountains in India, running for 300 m. in a
north-easterly direction, through the Rajputana states and the British
district of Ajmere-Merwara, situated between 24° and 27° 10' N. lat.,
and between 72° and 75° E. long. They consist of a series of ridges and
peaks, with a breadth varying from 6 to 60 m. and an elevation of 1000
to 3000 ft., the highest point being Mount Abu, rising to 5653 ft., near
the south-western extremity of the range. Geologically they belong to
the primitive formation--granite, compact dark blue slate, gneiss and
syenite. The dazzling white effect of their peaks is produced, not by
snow, as among the Himalayas, but by enormous masses of vitreous
rose-coloured quartz. On the north their drainage forms the Luni and
Sakhi rivers, which fall into the Gulf of Cutch. To the south, their
drainage supplies two distinct river systems, one of which debouches in
comparatively small streams on the Gulf of Cambay, while the other
unites to form the Chambal river, a great southern tributary of the
Jumna, flowing thence via the Ganges, into the Bay of Bengal on the
other side of India. The Aravalli hills are for the most part bare of
cultivation, and even of jungle. Many of them are mere heaps of sand and
stone; others consist of huge masses of quartz. The valleys between the
ridges are generally sandy deserts, with an occasional oasis of
cultivation. At long intervals, however, a fertile tract marks some
great natural line of drainage, and among such valleys Ajmere city, with
its lake, stands conspicuous. The hills are inhabited by a very sparse
population of Mhairs, an aboriginal race. For long these people formed a
difficult problem to the British government. Previously to the British
occupation of India they had been accustomed to live, almost destitute
of clothing, by the produce of their herds, by the chase and by plunder.
But Ajmere having been ceded to the East India Company in 1818, the
Mhair country was soon afterwards brought under British influence, and
the predatory instincts of the people were at the same time controlled
and utilized by forming them into a Merwara battalion. As the peaceful
results of British rule developed, and the old feuds between the Mhairs
and their Rajput neighbours died out, the Mhair battalion was
transformed into a police force. The Aravalli mountaineers strongly
objected to this change, and pleaded a long period of loyal usefulness
to the state. They were accordingly again erected into a military
battalion and brought upon the roll of the British army. Under Lord
Kitchener's scheme of 1903 they were entitled the 50th Merwara Infantry.
The Aravalli hills send off rocky ridges in a north-easterly direction
through the states of Alwar and Jaipur, which from time to time reappear
in the form of isolated hills and broken rocky elevations to near Delhi.