ARBITRAGE, the term applied to the system of equalizing prices in
different commercial centres by buying in the cheaper market and selling
in the dearer. These transactions, or their converse, are mainly
confined to stocks and shares, foreign exchanges and bullion; and are
for the most part carried on between London and other European capitals
and largely with New York. When prices in London are affected by
financial or political causes, all other markets are sooner or later
influenced, as London is the banking and financial centre for the
commerce of the world. It may, however, also occur that some local event
of importance initiates a rise or fall in a particular market which must
ultimately affect other countries. For instance, a crisis in France
would immediately depress all French securities, and by exciting the
fears of capitalists would stimulate transfers of funds and raise all
the exchanges against France.

In ordinary times those engaged in arbitrage operate with a very small
margin of profit. The great improvement in postal, telegraphic and
telephonic communication enables operators to close transactions with
amazing rapidity, while competition reduces the margin of profit to a
minimum. Operations in American stocks and shares are carried on between
London and New York on a vast scale, while transactions in African
mining shares are undertaken to a considerable extent between London and
Paris. The frequent fluctuations in the prices of the latter securities
offer a large and fruitful field to bold operators possessed of large
resources, while those who have small means often succumb in a
commercial crisis. As regards foreign exchange and bullion, arbitrage
operators stand on a fairly safe foundation, the fluctuations being
slight and involving little or no risk, although they yield a very small
margin of profit. Arbitrage operations are for these reasons resorted to
frequently by one country in supplying the requirements of another. The
slightest advantage in any market is put to profit, and as the margin in
ordinary exchange transactions is minute, the ability to operate in this
cross fashion renders business possible, which would otherwise be
impracticable. To give concrete instances of the working of arbitrage
the following may be cited:--

On the 21st of May 1906 the exchange on London in Vienna was telegraphed
from that city 24 kronen 4¾ cents; London, requiring to purchase
remittances, found that Antwerp had some Vienna to sell, and arranged to
buy there. The transactions worked out as follows:--The direct exchange
in Antwerp on London being 25.25½, and Antwerp's selling price of Vienna
being 105 francs for 100 kronen, on dividing 25.25½ by 105 an exchange
of 24.05¼ was obtained or ½ cent cheaper than the direct exchange
between Vienna and London.

Again a portion of the proceeds of the Russian loan of 1906 had to be
remitted to Berlin from Paris. Having exhausted local balances in
Berlin, Paris on one side, and Berlin on the other, sought to prevent
gold shipments from Berlin, and thus cause stringency in that money
market. On the 21st of May 1906 Berlin was therefore seeking to sell
Paris in London at 81.35 marks for 100 francs, and draw on London for
the proceeds at 20.50. This transaction produced a parity between the
exchanges of 25.20, which left a small margin in London.

Two instances of arbitrage of stocks are the following:--On the 24th of
March 1906, Japanese exchequer bonds, series 2 and 3, were bought in
Tokio at 93¼ and were paid for by telegraphic transfer at 24-3/8 pence
per yen, and were sold in London the same day at 94 for payment on
arrival of bonds. It took five weeks for the transmission of the bonds
to London, where they were dealt in on the fixed basis of exchange,
namely 24½ pence per yen. The London price works out thus:

  93.25 × 24.375
  -------------- = 92.77,
      24.50

to which must be added the loss of interest, as the firm in London paid
cash on the 24th of March for the telegraphic transfer, and did not
recover payment until the arrival of the bonds from Tokio five weeks
later. The following is a computation of the transaction:--

  London price                         92.77
  Five weeks at 5%                       .45
  English stamp ½% on nominal amount     .50
  Insurance 1/8%                         .12
                                       -----
                                       93.84

This sum represents the net cost to the arbitrage house in London, and
the money paid on the 28th of April left a profit of about 3/16%. The
bonds being "to bearer" insurance was necessary for the safety in this,
as in all similar transactions.

In the next example, however, this expense was unnecessary, the bonds
being "inscribed." On the 21st of May 1906 American Steel common shares
were sold for cash in New York at 41-3/16 dollars per share, and were
bought in London at 42-7/32 for the account day, May 31st. These figures
are explained by the fact that transactions in the United States stocks
and shares are on the fixed basis of five dollars per pound sterling,
while as regards payments in New York the exchange varies daily. Railway
shares are generally 100 dollars each. In the London market, however,
five shares of 100 dollars would be £100 nominal. These shares,
therefore, cost in London, at the purchase price of 42-7/32, £42:4:5.
The money realized in New York for five shares at 41-3/16 was 205·93
dollars. A cheque on London was bought at 4 dollars 85¼ cents, realizing
£42:8:9. It should be noted that the shares in these cases are generally
lent by the New York correspondent, thus saving loss of interest. The
resulting profit in this particular instance was 4s. 4d. for each five
shares, divided between the London and New York arbitrage firms.
Arbitrage operations with distant countries such as India are large and
mainly profitable. Arbitrage with India consists chiefly in buying bills
of exchange in London, such as India Council rupee bills amounting to
about 16 millions sterling annually, and commercial bills drawn against
goods exported to India. The counter-operation consists in purchasing in
India, for short or long delivery, sterling bills drawn against exports
to Great Britain of Indian produce, such as cotton, tea, indigo, jute
and wheat. These operations greatly facilitate trade and the moving of
produce from the interior of India to the seaports. Without this
assistance Great Britain's enormous trade could not be carried on, and
she would have to revert to the primitive system of barter. The same
advantages are afforded to her vast trade with China and Japan, with the
material difference that the supply of government council bills is
confined to the Indian trade. The balance of trade with all countries is
generally settled by specie shipments; hence, with the Far East, silver
and gold play an important part in arbitrage.

It will thus be seen that arbitrage fills a useful place in commerce;
the profits are small because the competition is great; nevertheless
huge transactions employing thousands of clerks result from this system.

  The literature of the subject is extremely meagre. Lord Goschen's
  _Theory of Foreign Exchanges_ (London, 1866) is general and
  theoretical, but throws great light upon particular aspects of the
  philosophy of arbitrage, without touching specially on the details of
  the subject itself. The principal other works are: Kelly's _Cambist_
  (1811, 1835); Otto Swoboda, _Die kaufmannische Arbitrage_ (Berlin,
  1873), and _Borse und Actien_ (Cologne, 1869); Coquelin et Guillaumin,
  _Dictionnaire de l'économie politique_ (Paris, 1851-1853); Ottomar
  Haupt, _London Arbitrageur_ (London, 1870); Charles le Touzé, _Traité
  théorique et pratique du change_ (Paris, 1868); Tate, _Modern Cambist_
  (London, 1868); Simon Spitzer, _Ueber Munz- und Arbiragenrechnung_
  (Vienna, 1872); J.W. Gilbart, _Principles and Practice of Banking_
  (London, 1871); G. Clare, _The A B C of Foreign Exchanges_ (2nd ed.,
  1895); _Money Market Primer and Key to the Exchanges_ (2nd ed., 1900);
  J. Pallain, _Les Changes étrangers et les prix_ (Paris, 1905).
       (Sw.)