ARBITRATION (Lat. _arbitrari_, to examine or judge), a term derived from
the nomenclature of Roman law, and applied to an arrangement for taking,
and abiding by, the judgment of a selected person in some disputed
matter, instead of carrying it to the established courts of justice. In
disputes between states, arbitration has long played an important part
(see ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL). The present article is restricted to
arbitration under municipal law; but a separate article is also devoted
to the use of arbitration in labour disputes (see ARBITRATION AND
CONCILIATION).

_Roman Law._--Arrangements for avoiding the delay and expense of
litigation, and referring a dispute to friends or neutral persons, are a
natural practice, of which traces may be found in any state of society;
but it is from Roman Law that we derive arbitration as a system which
has found its way into the practice of European nations in general, and
has even evaded the dislike of the English common lawyers to the civil
law. The praetor, who had the arrangement of all trials or private suits
and the formal appointment of judges for them, referred the great
majority of such cases for decision to a judge who was styled usually
_judex_ but sometimes _arbiter_. The phrase _judex arbiterve_ frequently
occurs. The _judex_ and the _arbiter_ had the same functions, and
apparently the only express basis for the distinction between the two
words is that there might be several _arbitri_ but never more than one
_judex_ in a cause. The term _arbiter_ seems, however, to have been
sometimes used when the referee had a certain degree of latitude, and
was entitled to give weight to equitable considerations (Roby, _Inst.
Rom. Law_, i. 318; Hunter, _Roman Law_ (1897), p. 48; and see Cicero
_pro Rosc. Com._ 4, ss. 10-13; Gaius, _Inst._ iv. s. 163). Apart from
this system of compulsory reference by the praetor, Roman law recognized
a voluntary reference (_compromissum_) to an _arbiter_ or arbitrator by
the parties themselves. The arbitrator _ex compromisso sumptus_ had no
coercive jurisdiction, and in order to make his award effective, the
agreement of reference was confirmed by a stipulation and usually
provided a penalty (_poena, pecunia compromissa_) in case of
disobedience. The sum agreed on by way of penalty might be either
specific or unliquidated, e.g. "whatever the matter may be worth"
(_Dig._ iv., tit. 8, s. 28). The arbitrator _ex compromisso sumptus_,
like the judicial _arbiter_, was expected to take account of equitable
considerations in coming to a decision. If three arbitrators were
appointed, a majority could decide; in case of two being appointed and
not agreeing, the praetor would compel them to choose a third (Roby,
_ubi sup._, i. 320, 321; _Dig._ iv., tit. 8, s. 17). As in English law,
it was necessary that the award should cover all the points submitted
(_Dig._ iv., tit. 8, s. 21).

_Law of England._--The law of England as to arbitration is now
practically summed up in the Arbitration Act of 1889. This statute is an
express code as to proceedings in all arbitration, but "criminal
proceedings by the crown" cannot be referred under it (ss. 13, 14). The
statute subdivides its subject-matter into two headings. I. References
by consent out of court; II. References under order of court.

  References by consent of the court.

(1) Here the first matter to be dealt with is the submission. A
submission is defined as a written agreement (it need not be signed by
both parties) to submit present or future differences to arbitration,
whether a particular arbitrator is named in it or not. The capacity of a
person to agree to arbitration, or to act as arbitrator, depends on the
general law of contract. A submission by an infant is not void, but is
voidable at his option (see INFANT). A counsel has a general authority
to deal with the conduct of an action, which includes authority to refer
it to arbitration, but he has no authority to refer an action against
the wishes of his client, or on terms different from those which his
client has sanctioned; and if he does so, the reference may be set
aside, although the limit put by the client on his counsel's authority
is not made known to the other side when the reference is agreed upon
(_Neale v. Gordon Lennox_, 1902, A.C. 465). The committee of a lunatic,
with the sanction of the judge in lunacy, may refer disputes to
arbitration. As an arbitrator is chosen by the parties themselves the
question of his eligibility is of comparatively minor importance; and
where an arbitrator has been chosen by both parties, the courts are
reluctant to set the appointment aside. This question has arisen chiefly
in contracts, for works, which frequently contain a provision that the
engineer shall be the arbitrator, in any dispute between the contractor
and his own employer. The practical result is to make the engineer judge
in his own cause. But the courts will not in such cases prevent the
engineer from acting, where the contractor was aware of the facts when
he signed the contract, and there is no reason to believe that the
engineer will be unfair (_Ives and Barker v. Willans_, 1894, 2 Ch. 478).
Even the fact that he has expressed an opinion on matters in dispute
will not of itself disqualify him (_Halliday v. Hamilton's Trustees_,
1903, 5 Fraser, 800). So, too, where a barrister was appointed
arbitrator, the court refused to stop the arbitration on the mere
ground that he was the client of a firm of solicitors, the conduct of
one of whom was in question (_Bright_ v. _River Plate Construction Co._,
1900, 2 Ch. 835).

Under the law prior to the act of 1889 (a) an agreement to refer
disputes generally, without naming the arbitrators, was always
irrevocable, and an action lay for the breach of it, although the court
could not compel either of the parties to proceed under it; (b) an
agreement to refer to a particular arbitrator was revocable, and if one
of the parties revoked that particular arbitrator's authority he could
not be compelled to submit to it; (c) when, however, the parties had got
their tribunal fixed, and were proceeding to carry out the agreement to
refer, the act 9 and 10 Will. III. c. 15 provided that the submission
might be made a rule of court, a provision which gave the court power to
assist the parties in the trial of the case, and to enforce the award of
the arbitrators; (d) the statute 3 and 4 Will. IV. c. 42 (s. 39) put an
end to the power to revoke the authority of a particular arbitrator
after the reference to him had been made a rule of court; and--a
liability which existed also under the act of 9 and 10 Will. III. c.
15--any person revoking the appointment of an arbitrator after the
submission had been made a rule of court might be attached. The
Arbitration Act 1889 provides that a submission, unless a contrary
intention is expressed in it, is irrevocable except by leave of the
court or a judge, and is to have the same effect in all respects as if
it had been made an order of court. The object of this enactment was to
save the expense of making a submission a rule of court by treating it
as having been so made, and it leaves the law in this position, that
while the authority of an arbitrator, once appointed, is irrevocable,
there is no power--any more than there was under the old law--to compel
an unwilling party to proceed to a reference, except in cases specially
provided for by sections 5 and 6 of the act of 1889. The former of these
sections deals with the power of the court, the latter with the power of
the parties to a reference, to appoint an arbitrator in certain
circumstances. Section 5 provides that where a reference is to be to a
single arbitrator, and all the parties do not concur in appointing one,
or an appointed arbitrator refuses to act or becomes incapable of
acting, or where the parties or two arbitrators fail, when necessary, to
appoint an umpire or third arbitrator, or such umpire or arbitrator when
appointed refuses to act, or becomes incapable of acting, and the
default is not rectified after seven clear days' notice, the court may
supply the vacancy. Under section 6, where a reference is to two
arbitrators, one to be appointed by each party, and either the appointed
arbitrator refuses to act, or becomes incapable of acting, and the party
appointing him fails, after seven clear days' notice, to supply the
vacancy, or such party fails, after similar notice, to make an original
appointment, a binding appointment (subject to the power of the court to
set it aside) may be made by the other party to the reference. The court
may compel parties to carry out an arbitration, not only in the above
cases by directly appointing an arbitrator, &c., or by allowing one
appointed by a party to proceed alone with the reference, but also
indirectly by staying any proceedings before the legal tribunals to
determine matters which come within the scope of the arbitration. Where
the agreement to refer stipulates that the submission of a dispute to
arbitration shall be a condition precedent to the right to bring an
action in regard to it, an action does not lie until the arbitration has
been held and an award made, and it is usual in such cases not to apply
for a stay of proceedings, but to plead the agreement as a bar to the
action (_Viney_ v. _Bignold_, 1887, 20 Q.B.D. 172). The court will
refuse to stay proceedings where the subject-matter of the litigation
falls outside the scope of the reference, or there is some serious
objection to the fitness of the arbitrator, or some other good reason of
the kind exists.

An arbitrator is not liable to be sued for want of skill or for
negligence in conducting the arbitration (_Pappa_ v. _Rose_, 1872, L.R.
7 C.P. 525). When a building contract provides that a certificate of the
architect, showing the final balance due to the contractor, shall be
conclusive evidence of the works having been duly completed, the
architect occupies the position of an arbitrator, and enjoys the same
immunity from liability for negligence in the discharge of his functions
(_Chambers_ v. _Goldthorpe_, 1901, 1 Q.B. 624). An arbitrator cannot be
compelled to act unless he is a party to the submission.

An arbitrator (and the following observations apply _mutatis mutandis_
to an umpire after he has entered on his duties) has power to administer
oaths to, or take the affirmations of, the parties and their witnesses;
and any person who wilfully and corruptly gives false evidence before
him may be prosecuted and punished for perjury (Arbitration Act 1889,
sched. i. and s. 22). At any stage in the reference he may, and shall if
he be required by the court, state in the form of a special case for the
opinion of the court any question of law arising in the arbitration. The
arbitrator may also state his award in whole or in part as a special
case (ib. s. 19), and may correct in an award any clerical mistake or
error arising from an accidental slip or omission. The costs of the
reference and the award--which, under sched. i. of the act, must be in
writing, unless the submission otherwise provides--are in the
arbitrator's discretion, and he has a lien on the award and the
submission for his fees, for which--if there is an express or implied
promise to pay them--he can also sue (_Crampton_ v. _Ridley_, 1887, 20
Q.B.D. 48). An arbitrator or umpire ought not, however, to state his
award in such a way as to deprive the parties of their right to
challenge the amount charged by him for his services; and accordingly
where an umpire fixed for his award a lump sum as costs, including
therein his own and the arbitrators' fees, the award was remitted back
to him to state how much he allotted to himself and how much to the
arbitrators (in _Re Gilbert_ v. _Wright_, 1904, 20 _Times_ L.R. 164).
But in the absence of evidence to show that the fees charged by
arbitrators or umpire are extortionate, or unfair and unreasonable, the
courts will not interfere with them (_Llandrindod Wells Water Co._ v.
_Hawksley_, 1904, 20 _Times_ L.R. 241).

If there is no express provision on the point in the submission, an
award under the Arbitration Act 1889 must be made within three months
after the arbitrator has entered on the reference, or been called upon
to act by notice in writing from any party to the submission. The time
may, however, be extended by the arbitrator or by the court. An umpire
is required to make his award within one month after the original or
extended time appointed for making the award of the arbitrators has
expired, or any later day to which he may enlarge it. The court may by
order remit an award to the arbitrators or umpire for reconsideration,
in which case the reconsidered award must be made within three months
after the date of the order.

An award must be _intra vires_: it must dispose of all the points
referred; and it must be final, except as regards certain matters of
valuation, &c. (see in _Re Stringer and Riley Brothers_, 1901, 1 K.B.
105). An award may, however, be set aside where the arbitrator has
misconducted himself (an arbitrator may also be removed by the court on
the ground of misconduct), or where it is _ultra vires_, or lacks any of
the other requisites--above mentioned--of a valid award, or where the
arbitrator has been wilfully deceived by one of the parties, or some
such state of things exists. An award may, by leave of the court, be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment or decree to the same effect.
Under the Revenue Act 1906, s. 9, a uniform duty of ten shillings is
payable on awards in England or Ireland, and on decreets arbitral in
Scotland.

  Provisions for the arbitration of special classes of disputes are
  contained in many acts of parliament, e.g. the Local Government Acts
  1888, 1894, the Agricultural Holdings (England) Acts 1883 to 1906, the
  Small Holdings and Allotments Act 1907, the Light Railways Act 1896,
  the Housing of the Working Classes Act 1890, the Workmen's
  Compensation Act 1906, &c.

  The Conciliation Act 1896 provides machinery for the prevention and
  settlement of trade disputes, and in 1892 a chamber of arbitration for
  business disputes was established by the joint action of the
  corporation of the city of London and the London chamber of commerce.
  At the time when the London chamber of arbitration was established,
  there was considerable dissatisfaction among the mercantile community
  with the delays that occurred in the disposal of commercial cases
  before the ordinary tribunals. But the special provision made by the
  judges in 1895 for the prompt trial of commercial causes to a large
  extent destroyed the _raison d'être_ of the chamber of arbitration,
  and it did not attain any great measure of success.

  References under order of court.

(2) The court or a judge may refer any question arising in any cause or
matter to an official or special referee, whose report may be enforced
like a judgment or order to the same effect. This power may be exercised
whether the parties desire it or not. The official referees are salaried
officers of court. The remuneration of special referees is determined by
the court or judge. An entire action may be referred, if all parties
consent, or if it involves any prolonged examination of documents, or
scientific or local examination, or consists wholly or partly of matters
of account.

  _Scots Law._--The Arbitration (Scotland) Act 1894, unlike the English
  Arbitration Act 1889, did not codify the previously existing law, and
  it becomes necessary, therefore, to deal with that law in some detail.
  It differs in important particulars from the law of England. Although
  (as in England apart from the Arbitration Act 1889) there is nothing
  to prevent a verbal reference, submissions are generally not merely
  written but are effected by deed. The deed of submission first defines
  the terms of the reference, the name or names of the arbiters or
  arbitrators, and the "oversman" or umpire, whose decision in the event
  of the arbiters differing in opinion is to be final. Formerly, where
  no oversman was named in the submission, and no power given to the
  arbiters to name one, the proceedings were abortive if the arbiters
  disagreed, unless the parties consented to a nomination. But under the
  Arbitration (Scotland) Act 1894, s. 4, here arbiters differ in
  opinion, they, or, if they fail to agree on the point, the court, on
  the application of either party, may nominate an oversman whose
  decision is to be final. The deed of submission next gives to the
  arbiters the necessary powers for disposing of the matters referred
  (e.g. powers to summon witnesses, to administer oaths and to award
  expenses), and specifies the time within which the "decreet arbitral"
  is to be pronounced. If this date is left blank, practice has limited
  the arbiter's power of deciding to a year and a day, unless, having
  express or clearly implied power in the submission, he exercises this
  power, or the parties expressly or tacitly agree to its prorogation.
  The deed of submission then goes on to provide that the parties bind
  themselves, under a stipulated penalty to abide by the decreet
  arbitral, that, in the event of the death of either of them, the
  submission shall continue in force against their heirs and
  representatives, and that they consent to the registration, for
  preservation and execution, both of the deed itself and of the decreet
  arbitral. The power to enforce the award depends on this last
  provision. Under the common law of Scotland, a submission of future
  disputes or differences to an arbiter, or arbiters, unnamed, was
  ineffectual except where the agreement to refer did not contemplate
  the decision of proper disputes between the parties but the adjustment
  of some condition, or the liquidation of some obligation, contained in
  the contract of which the agreement to submit formed a part. And by
  the Arbitration (Scotland) Act 1894, s. 1, an agreement to refer to
  arbitration is not invalid by reason of the reference being to a
  person not named, or to be named by another, or to a person merely
  described as the holder for the time being of any office or
  appointment. An arbiter who has accepted office may be compelled by an
  action in court of session to proceed with his duty unless he has
  sufficient cause, such as ill-health or supervening interest, for
  renouncing. The court may name a sole arbiter, where provision is made
  for one only and the parties cannot agree (Arbitration [Scotland] Act
  1894, s. 2); and may name an arbiter where a party having the right or
  duty to nominate one of two arbiters will not exercise it (_ib._ s.
  3). Scots law as to the requisites of a valid award is practically
  identical with the law of England. The grounds of reduction of a
  decreet arbitral are "corruption," "bribery," "false hold" (Scots Act
  of Regulations 1695, s. 25). An attempt was made to include, under the
  expression "constructive corruption," among these statutory grounds of
  reduction, irregular conduct on the part of an arbitrator, with no
  suggestion of any corrupt motive. But it was definitely overruled by
  the House of Lords (_Adams_ v. _Great North of Scotland Railway Co._,
  1891, A.C. 31). The statutory definition of the grounds of reduction
  was intended, however, merely to put an end to the practice which had
  previously obtained of reviewing awards on their merits, and it does
  not prevent the courts from setting aside an award where the
  arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction, or disregarded any one of
  the expressed conditions of the submission, or been guilty of
  misconduct. A private arbiter cannot demand remuneration except in
  virtue of contract, or by implication from the nature of the work
  done, or if the reference is in pursuance of some statutory enactment
  (e.g. the Lands Clauses [Scotland] Act 1845, s. 32).

  _Judicial References_ have been long known to the law of Scotland.
  When an action is in court the parties may at any stage withdraw it
  from judicial determination, and refer it to arbitration. This is done
  by minute of reference to which the court interpones its authority.
  When the award is issued it becomes the judgment of the court. The
  court has no power to compel parties to enter into a reference of this
  kind, and it is doubtful whether counsel can bind their clients in
  such a matter. A judicial reference falls like the other by the elapse
  of a year; and the court cannot review the award on the ground of
  miscarriage. By the Court of Session Act 1850, s. 50, a provision is
  introduced whereby parties to an action in the supreme court may refer
  judicially any issue for trial to one, three, five or seven persons,
  who shall sit as a jury, and decide by a majority.

  _Law of Ireland._--The Common Law Procedure Act (Ireland) 1856, which
  is incorporated by s. 60 of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act
  (Ireland) 1877, and thereby made applicable to all divisions of the
  High Court of Justice, provides, on the lines of the English Common
  Law Procedure Act 1854, for the conduct of arbitrations and the
  enforcement of awards. Irish statute law, like that of England and
  Scotland, contains numerous provisions for arbitration under special
  enactments.

  _Indian and Colonial Law._--The provisions of the English Arbitration
  Act 1889 have in substance been adopted by the Indian Legislature (see
  Act ix. of 1899), and by many of the colonies (see, e.g., Act No. 13
  of 1895, Western Australia; No. 24 of 1898, Natal; c. 20 of 1899,
  Bahamas; No. 10 of 1895, Gibraltar; No. 29 of 1898, Cape of Good Hope:
  s. 7 of this last statute excludes from submission to arbitration
  criminal cases, so far as prosecution and punishment are concerned,
  and, without the special leave of the court, matters relating to
  status, matrimonial causes, and matters affecting minors or other
  perons under legal disability; Trinidad and Tobago, No. 35 of 1898).

_United States._--The common law and statute law of the United States as
to arbitration bear a general resemblance to the law of England.

  Voluntary submissions.

All controversies of a civil nature, and any question of personal injury
on which a suit for damages will lie, although it may also be
indictable, may be referred to arbitration; but crimes, and perhaps
actions on penal statutes by common informers may not. The submission
may be effected sometimes by parol, sometimes by written instrument,
sometimes by deed or deed poll. Capacity to refer depends on the general
law of contractual capacity. The law of England as to the capacity to
act as an arbitrator and as to objections to an arbitrator on the ground
of interest has been closely followed by the American courts. The same
observation applies as to the requisites of an award, the mode of its
enforcement and the grounds on which it will be set aside. The
arbitrator has a lien on the award for his fees; and--a point of
difference from the English law--he may sue for them without an express
promise to pay (cf. _Goodall_ v. _Cooley_, 1854, 29 New Hamp. 48). At
common law, a submission is generally revocable at any time before
award; and it is also, in the absence of stipulation to the contrary,
revoked by the death of one of the parties. Provision has been made in
Pennsylvania for compulsory arbitration by an act of the 16th of June
1836 (see Pepper and Lewis, _Pennsylvania Digest, tit._ "arbitration").

  References by rule of court.

The rules of court also of many of the states of the United States
provide for reference through the intervention of the court at any stage
in the progress of a litigation. Such submissions are usually declared
irrevocable by the rules providing for them.

  Statutory arbitrations.

In addition to voluntary submissions and references by rules of court
there are in America, as in the United Kingdom, various statutes which
provide for arbitration in particular cases. Most of these statutes are
founded on the 9 and 10 Will. III., c. 15, and 3 and 4 Will. IV. c. 42,
s. 49, "by which it is allowed to refer a matter in dispute (not then in
court) to arbitrators, and agree that the submission be made a rule of
court. This agreement, being proved on the oath of one of the witnesses
thereto, is enforced as if it had been made at first a rule of court"
(Bouvier, _Law Dict_. s.v. "Arbitration").

Ample provision is made in America for the arbitration of labour
disputes.

  _Law of France._--Voluntary arbitration has always been recognized in
  France. In cases of mercantile partnerships, arbitration was formerly
  compulsory; but in 1856 (law of the 17th of July 1856) jurisdiction in
  disputes between parties was conferred on the Tribunals of Commerce
  (as to which see _Code de Commerce_, arts. 615 et seq.), and
  arbitration at the present time is purely voluntary. The subject is
  very fully dealt with in the _Code de Procédure Civile_ (arts.
  1003-1028). The submission to arbitration (_compromis_) must, on pain
  of nullity, be acted upon within three months from its date (art.
  1007). The submission terminates (i.) by the death, refusal,
  resignation or inability to act of one of the arbitrators; (ii.) by
  the expiration of the period agreed upon, or of three months if no
  time had been fixed; (iii.) by the disagreement of two arbitrators,
  unless power be reserved to them to appoint an umpire (art. 1012). An
  arbitrator cannot resign if he has once commenced to act, and can only
  be relieved on some ground arising subsequently to the submission
  (art. 1014). Each party to the arbitration is required to produce his
  evidence at least fifteen days before the expiration of the period
  fixed by the submission (art. 1016). If the arbitrators, differing in
  opinion, cannot agree upon an umpire (_tiers arbitre_), the president
  of the Tribunal of Commerce will appoint one, on the application of
  either party (art. 1017). The umpire is required to give his decision
  within one month of his acceptance of the appointment; before making
  his award, he must confer with the previous arbitrators who disagreed
  (art. 1018). Arbitrators and umpire must proceed according to the
  ordinary rules of law, unless they are specially empowered by the
  submission to proceed as _amiables compositeurs_ (art. 1019). The
  award is rendered executory by an order of the president of the Civil
  Tribunal of First Instance (art. 1020). Awards cannot be set up
  against third parties (art. 1022), or attacked by way of opposition.
  An appeal against an award lies to the Civil Tribunal of First
  Instance, or to the court of appeal, according as the subject-matter,
  in the absence of arbitration, would have been within the jurisdiction
  of the justice of the peace, or of the Civil Tribunal of First
  Instance (art. 1023). In the manufacturing towns of France, there are
  also boards of umpires (_Conseils de Prud'hommes_) to deal with trade
  disputes between masters and workmen belonging to certain specified
  trades.

  _Other Foreign Laws._--The provisions of French law as to arbitration
  are in force in Belgium (_Code de Proc. Civ._, arts. 1003 et seq.);
  and a convention (8th of July 1899) between France and Belgium
  regulates, _inter alia_, the mutual enforcement of awards. The law of
  France has also been reproduced in substance in the Netherlands (Code
  of Civil Procedure, arts. 620 et seq.). The German Imperial Code of
  Procedure did not create any system of arbitration in civil cases. But
  this omission was supplied in Prussia by a law of the 29th of March
  1879, which provided for the appointment, in each commune, of an
  arbitrator (_Schiedsmann_) before whom conciliation proceedings in
  contentious matters might be conducted. The procedure was gratuitous
  and voluntary; and the functions of the arbitrator were not judicial;
  he merely recorded the arrangement arrived at, or the refusal of
  conciliation. This law was followed in Brunswick by a law of the 2nd
  of July 1896, and in Baden by a law of the 16th of April 1886. In
  Luxemburg, compulsory arbitration in matters affecting commercial
  partnerships was abolished in 1879 (law of the 16th of April 1879). A
  system of conciliation, similar to the Prussian, exists in Italy (laws
  of the 16th of June 1892, and the 26th of December 1892) and in some
  of the Swiss cantons (law of the 29th of April 1883). Spain (Code of
  Civil Proc., arts. 1003-1028; Civil Code, arts. 1820-1821) and Sweden
  and Norway (law of the 28th of October 1887) have followed the French
  law. In Portugal, provision has been made for the creation in
  important industrial centres, on the application of the administrative
  corporations, of boards of conciliation (decrees of the 14th of August
  1889, and the 18th of May 1893).

  AUTHORITIES.--Russell, _Arbitration_ (London, 1906); _Annual Practice_
  (London, yearly); Redman, _Arbitration_ (London, 1897); Crewe,
  _Arbitration Act of 1889_ (London, 1898); Pollock, _On Arbitrators_
  (London, 1906). As to Scots law: Bell, _On Arbitration_ (2nd ed.,
  Edinburgh, 1877); Erskine, _Principles_ (20th ed., Edinburgh, 1903).
  As to American law: Morse, _Law of Arbitration_ (Boston, 1872). As to
  foreign law generally: the texts of the laws cited, and the _Annuaire
  de législation étrangère_.     (A. W. R.)