ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. The terms "arbitration and conciliation"
as employed in this article, are used to describe a group of methods of
settling disputes between employers and work-people or among two or more
sets of work-people, of which the common feature is the intervention of
some outside party not directly affected by the dispute. If the parties
agree beforehand to abide by the award of the third party, the mode of
settlement is described as "arbitration." If there be no such agreement,
but the offices of the mediator are used to promote an amicable
arrangement between the parties themselves, the process is described as
"conciliation." The third party may be one or more disinterested
individuals, or a joint-board representative of the parties or of other
bodies or persons.

The process here termed "arbitration" is rarely an arbitration in the
strict legal sense of the term (at least in the United Kingdom), because
of the defective legal personality of the associations or groups of
individuals who are usually parties to labour disputes, and the
consequent absence in the great majority of cases of a valid legal
"submission" of the difference to arbitration. Whether or not trade
unions of employers or workmen in the United Kingdom are capable of
entering through their agents into contracts which are legally binding
on their members it is fairly certain that the great majority of the
agreements actually made by the representatives of employers and workmen
to submit a dispute to the decision of a third party are of no legal
force except as regards the actual signatories. Broadly speaking,
therefore, the provisions of the Arbitration Act 1889, which
consolidated the law relating to arbitration in general, would as a rule
have no application to the settlement of collective disputes between
employers and workmen, even if the act had not been expressly excluded
by section 3 of the Conciliation Act of 1896 in the case of disputes to
which that act applies. Besides the absence of a legal "submission,"
labour arbitrations differ from ordinary arbitrations in the fact that
the questions referred often (though by no means always) relate to the
terms on which future contracts shall be made, whereas the vast majority
of ordinary arbitrations relate to questions arising out of existing
contracts. The defective "personality" of the parties to labour disputes
also prevents the enforcement of an award by legal penalties. Since,
however, difficulties of enforcement affect not only settlements arrived
at by arbitration, but all agreements between bodies of employers and
work-people with regard to the terms of employment, they are most
appropriately considered at a later stage of this article.

The term "conciliation" is ordinarily used to cover a large number of
methods of settlement, shading off in the one direction into
"arbitration" and in the other into ordinary direct negotiation between
the parties. In some cases conciliation only differs from arbitration in
the absence of a previous agreement to accept the award. The German
"_Gewerbegerichten_," when dealing with labour disputes, communicate a
decision to both parties, who must notify their acceptance or otherwise
(see below). Some of the state boards in America take similar action.
The conciliation boards established under the New Zealand Arbitration
Act of 1894 (see below) make recommendations, though either side may
decline to accept them and may appeal to the court of arbitration, which
in that colony has compulsory powers. Most frequently, however, in Great
Britain, the mediating party abstains from pronouncing a definite
judgment of his own, but confines himself to friendly suggestions with a
view of removing obstacles to an agreement between the parties. On the
other hand, it is not easy to define how far the "outside party" must be
independent of the parties to the dispute, in order that the method of
settlement may be properly described as "conciliation." There is a sense
in which a friendly conversation between an employer or his manager and
a deputation of aggrieved workmen is rightly described as
"conciliation," but such an interview would certainly not be covered by
the term as ordinarily used at the present day. Again, when the parties
are represented by agents (e.g. the officials of an employers'
association and of a trade union) the actual negotiators or some of them
may not personally be affected by the particular dispute, and may often
exercise some of the functions of the mediator or conciliator in a
manner not clearly to be distinguished from the action of an outside
party. It seems best, however, to exclude such negotiations from our
purview so long as those between whom they are carried on merely act as
the authorized agents for the parties affected. In the same way, a
meeting arranged _ad hoc_ between delegates of an employers' association
and a trade union, for the purpose of arranging differences as to the
terms on which the members of the association shall employ members of
the union is not usually classed as "conciliation," unless the meeting
is held in the presence of an independent chairman or conciliator, or in
pursuance of a permanent agreement between the associations laying down
the procedure for the settlement of disputes. If, however, the dispute
is considered and arranged not by a casual meeting between two
committees and deputations appointed _ad hoc_, but by a permanently
organized "joint committee" or board with a constitution, rules of
procedure and officers of its own, the process of settlement is by
ordinary usage described as "conciliation," even though the board be
entirely representative of the persons engaged in the industry. Such
joint boards, as will be seen, play a most important part in
conciliation at the present day, and they almost always have attached to
them some machinery for the ultimate decision by arbitration of
questions on which they fail to agree. Another form of conciliation is
that in which the mediating board represents a wider group of industries
than those affected by the dispute (e.g. the London and other
"district" boards referred to below). Moreover, in some of the most
important cases of settlement of disputes by conciliation, the mediating
party has not been a permanent board but a disinterested individual,
e.g. the mayor, county court judge, government official or member of
parliament. As will be seen below, the Conciliation Act now provides for
the appointment of "conciliators" by the Board of Trade.

Voluntary trade boards, however (i.e. permanent joint boards
representing employers and work-people in particular trades), are at
once the most firmly established and the most important agencies in
Great Britain for the prevention and settlement of labour disputes.
Among the earliest of such bodies was the board of arbitration in the
Macclesfield silk trade, formed in 1849, in imitation of the French
"_Conseils de Prud'hommes_," but which only lasted four years. The first
board, however, which attained any degree of permanent success was that
established for the hosiery and glove trade in Nottingham in 1860,
through the efforts of A.J. Mundella. In 1864 a board was established in
the Wolverhampton building trades, with Rupert Kettle as chairman, and
in 1868 boards were formed for the pottery trade, the Leicester hosiery
trade and the Nottingham lace trade. In 1869 there was formed one of the
most important of the still existing boards, viz. the board of
arbitration and conciliation in the manufactured iron and steel trades
of the north of England, with which the names of Rupert Kettle, David
Dale and others are associated. In 1872 and 1873 joint committees were
formed in the Durham and Northumberland coal trades to deal with local
questions. The Leicester boot and shoe trade board, the first of an
elaborate system of local boards in this trade, was founded in 1875.
From about 1870 onwards there was a great movement for the establishment
of "sliding scales" in the coal and iron and steel trades, which by
regulating wages automatically rendered unnecessary the settlement of
general wages by conciliation or arbitration. These sliding scales,
however, usually had attached to them joint committees for dealing with
disputed questions. A sliding scale arranged by David Dale was attached
to the manufactured iron trade board in 1871. A sliding scale for the
Cleveland blast furnacemen came into force in 1879. Sliding scales were
also adopted in the coal trade in many districts, e.g. South Wales
(1875), Durham (1877) and Northumberland (1879). The movement was,
however, followed by a reaction, and several of the sliding scales in
the coal trade were terminated between 1887 and 1889. In 1902 the last
surviving sliding scale in the coal trade, viz. in South Wales, ceased
to exist and was replaced by a conciliation board.

The formation on a large scale of conciliation boards in the coal trade
to fix the rate of wages dates from the great miners' dispute of 1893,
one of the terms of settlement agreed to at the conference held at the
foreign office under Lord Rosebery being the formation of a conciliation
board covering the districts affected. Northumberland followed in 1894,
Durham in 1895, Scotland in 1900 and South Wales in 1903.

In 1907 an important scheme for the formation of conciliation boards for
railway companies and their employees was adopted as the result of the
action taken by the president of the Board of Trade to prevent a general
strike of railway servants in that year. Under this scheme separate
boards (sectional and general) were to be formed for the employees of
each railway company which adhered to the scheme, with provision for
reference in case of a deadlock to an umpire.

The first general district board to be formed was that established in
London in 1890, through the London chamber of commerce, as a sequel to
the Mansion House committee which mediated in the great London dock
strike of 1889. The example was followed by several large towns, but the
action taken by the boards in most of these provincial districts has
been very limited.

In addition there are two boards composed of representatives of
co-operators and trade-unionists for the settlement of disputes arising
between co-operative societies and their employees.

  Constitution and functions of voluntary conciliation boards.

The most typical form of machinery for the settlement of disputes by
voluntary conciliation is a joint board consisting of equal numbers of
representatives of employers and employed. The members of the board are
usually elected by the associations of employers and workmen, though in
some cases (e.g. in the manufactured iron trade board) the workmen's
representatives are elected not by their trade union but by meetings of
workmen employed at the various works. The chairman may be an
independent person, or, more usually, a representative of the employers,
the vice-chairman being a representative of the workmen. In the
arbitration and conciliation boards in the boot and shoe trade,
provision is made by which the chair may be occupied by representatives
of the employers and workmen in alternate years. An independent chairman
usually has a casting vote, which practically makes him an umpire in
case of equal voting, but where there is no outside chairman there is
often provision for reference of cases on which the board cannot agree
to an umpire, who may either be a permanent officer of the board elected
for a period of time (as in the case of several of the boards in the
boot and shoe trade), or selected _ad hoc_ by the board or appointed by
some outside person or body. Thus the choice of the permanent chairman
or umpire of the miners' conciliation board, formed in pursuance of the
settlement of the coal dispute of 1893 by Lord Rosebery, was left to the
speaker of the House of Commons. The nomination of umpires under the
Railway Agreement of 1907 was left to the speaker and the master of the
rolls. Since the passing of the Conciliation Act, several conciliation
boards have provided in their rules for the appointment of umpires by
the Board of Trade.

Conciliation boards constituted as described above usually have rules
providing that there shall always be equality of voting as between
employer and workmen, in spite of the casual absence of individuals on
one side or the other. In order to expedite business it is sometimes
provided that all questions shall be first considered by a
sub-committee, with power to settle them by agreement before coming
before the full board. Boards of conciliation and arbitration conforming
more or less to the above type exist in the coal, iron and steel, boot
and shoe and other industries in the United Kingdom. A somewhat
different form of organization has prevailed in the cotton-spinning
trade (since the dispute of 1892-1893) and in the engineering trade
(since the engineering dispute of 1897-1898). In these important
industries there are no permanent boards for the settlement of general
questions, but elaborate agreements are in force between the employers'
and workmen's organizations which among other things prescribe the mode
in which questions at issue shall be dealt with and if possible settled.
In the first place, if the question cannot be settled between the
employer and his workmen, it is dealt with by the local associations or
committees or their officials, and failing a settlement in this manner,
is referred to a joint meeting of the executive committees of the two
associations. In neither agreement is there any provision for the
ultimate decision of unsettled questions by arbitration. The agreement
in the cotton trade is known as the "Brooklands Agreement," and a large
number of questions have been amicably settled under its provisions. In
the building trade, it is very customary for the local "working rules,"
agreed to mutually by employers and employed in particular districts, to
contain "conciliation rules" providing for the reference of disputed
questions to a joint committee with or without an ultimate reference to
arbitration. Yet another form of voluntary board is the "district
board," consisting in most cases of representatives elected in equal
numbers by the local chamber of commerce and trades council
respectively. In the case, however, of the London Conciliation Board the
workmen's representatives are elected, twelve by specially summoned
meetings of trade union delegates and two by co-optation. The functions
of district boards are to deal with disputes in any trade which may
occur within their districts, and of course they can only take action
with the consent of both parties to the dispute, in this respect
differing from the majority of "trade" boards, which, as a rule, are
empowered by the agreement under which they are constituted to deal
with questions on the application of either party. Another interesting
type of board is that representing two or more groups of workmen and
sometimes their employers, with the object of settling "demarcation"
disputes between the groups of workmen (i.e. questions as to the limits
of the work which each group may claim to perform). Examples of such
boards are those representing shipwrights and joiners on the Clyde, Tyne
and elsewhere. While the arrangements for voluntary conciliation and
arbitration differ in this way in various industries, there is an
equally wide variation in the character and range of questions which the
boards are empowered to determine. For example, some boards in the coal
trade (e.g. the conciliation boards in Northumberland and the so-called
"Federated Districts") deal solely with the general rate of wages.
Others, e.g. the "joint committee" in Northumberland and Durham, confine
their attention solely to local questions not affecting the counties as
a whole. The Durham conciliation board deals with any general or county
questions. This distinction between "general" and "local" questions
corresponds nearly, though not entirely, to the distinction often drawn
between questions of the terms of future employment and of the
interpretation of existing agreements. Some conciliation boards are
unlimited as regards the scope of the questions which they may consider.
This was formerly the case with the boards in the boot and shoe trade,
but under the "terms of settlement" of the dispute in 1895 drawn up at
the Board of Trade, certain classes of questions (e.g. the employment of
particular individuals, the adoption of piece-work or time-work, &c.)
were wholly or partially withdrawn from their consideration, and any
decision of a board contravening the "terms of settlement" is null and
void. A special feature in the procedure for conciliation and
arbitration in the boot and shoe trade, is the deposit by each party of
£1000 with trustees, as a financial guarantee for the performance of
agreements and awards. A certain class of conciliation boards, mostly in
the Midland metal trades, were attached to "alliances" of employers and
employed, having for their object the regulation of production and of
prices (e.g. the Bedstead Trade Wages Board). None of these alliances,
however, have survived.

  Legislation in the United Kingdom.

At all events up to the year 1896, the development of arbitration and
conciliation as methods of settling labour disputes in the United
Kingdom was entirely independent of any legislation. Previously to the
Conciliation Act of 1896 several attempts had been made by parliament to
promote arbitration and conciliation, but with little or no practical
result, and the act of 1896 repealed all previous legislation on the
subject, at the same time excluding the operation of the Arbitration Act
of 1889 from the settlement of "any difference or dispute to which this
act applies." The laws repealed by the Conciliation Act need only a few
words of mention. During the 18th century the fixing of wages by
magistrates under the Elizabethan legislation gradually decayed, and
acts of 1745 and 1757 gave summary jurisdiction to justices of the peace
to determine disputes between masters and servants in certain
circumstances, although no rate of wages had been fixed that year by the
justices of the peace of the shire. These and other laws, relating
specially to disputes in the cotton-weaving trade, were consolidated and
amended by the Arbitration Act of 1824. This act seems chiefly to have
been aimed at disputes relating to piece-work in the textile trades,
though applicable to other disputes arising out of a wages contract. It
expressly excluded, however, the fixing of a rate of wages or price of
labour or workmanship at which the workmen should in future be paid
unless with the mutual consent of both master and workmen. The act gave
compulsory powers of settling the disputes to which it relates on
application of either party to a court of arbitrators representing
employers and workmen nominated by a magistrate. The award could be
enforced by distress or imprisonment. The act was subsequently amended
in detail, and by the "Councils of Conciliation" Act of 1867 power was
given to the home secretary to license "equitable councils of
conciliation and arbitration" equally representative of masters and
workmen, who should thereupon have the powers conferred by the act of
1824. The act contains provisions for the appointment of conciliation
committees, and other details which are of little interest seeing that
the act was never put into operation. Another amendment of the act of
1824 was made by the Arbitration (Masters and Workmen) Act of 1872,
which contemplated the conclusion of agreements between employers and
employed, designating some board of arbitration by which disputes
included within the scope of the former acts should be determined. A
master or workman should be deemed to be bound by an agreement under the
act, if he accepted a printed copy of the agreement and did not
repudiate it within forty-eight hours. Like the previous legislation,
however, the act of 1872 was inoperative. The evidence given before the
Royal Commission on Labour (1891-1894) disclosed the existence of a
considerable body of opinion in favour of some further action by the
state for the prevention or settlement of labour disputes, and some
impetus was given to the movement by the settlement through official
mediation of several important disputes, e.g. the great coal-miners'
dispute of 1893 by a conference presided over by Lord Rosebery, the
cab-drivers' dispute of 1894 by the mediation of the home secretary
(H.H. Asquith), and the boot and shoe trade dispute of 1895 by a Board
of Trade conference under the chairmanship of Sir Courtenay Boyle. In
these, and a few other less important cases, the intervention of the
Board of Trade or other department took place without any special
statutory sanction. The Conciliation Act passed in 1896 was framed with
a view to giving express authorization to such action in the future.

This act is of a purely voluntary character. Its most important
provisions are those of section 2, empowering the Board of Trade in
cases "where a difference exists or is apprehended between any employer,
or any class of employers, and workmen, or between different classes of
workmen," to take certain steps to promote a settlement of the
difference. They may of their own initiative hold an inquiry or
endeavour to arrange a meeting between the parties under a chairman
mutually agreed on or appointed from the outside, and on the application
of either party they may appoint a conciliator or a board of
conciliation who shall communicate with the parties and endeavour to
bring about a settlement and report their proceedings to the Board of
Trade. On the application of both parties the Board of Trade may appoint
an arbitrator. In all cases the Board of Trade has discretion as to the
action to be taken, and there is no provision either for compelling the
parties to accept their mediation or to abide by any agreement effected
through their intervention. There are other provisions in the act
providing for the registration of voluntary conciliation boards, and for
the promotion by the Board of Trade of the formation of such boards in
districts and trades in which they are deficient. During the first
eleven years after the passage of the act the number of cases arising
under section 2 (providing for action by the Board of Trade for the
settlement of actual or apprehended disputes) averaged twenty-one per
annum, and the number of settlements effected fifteen. In the remaining
cases the Board of Trade either refused to entertain the application or
failed to effect a settlement, or the disputes were settled between the
parties during the negotiations. About three-quarters of the settlements
were effected by arbitration and one-quarter by conciliation. A number
of voluntary conciliation boards formed or reorganized since the passing
of the act provide in their rules for an appeal to the Board of Trade to
appoint an umpire in case of a deadlock. At least thirty-six trade
boards are known to have already adopted this course. The figures given
above show that the Conciliation Act of 1896 has not, like previous
legislation, been a dead letter, though the number of actual disputes
settled is small compared with the total number annually recorded.

  Proposals for compulsion.

Arbitration and conciliation in labour disputes as practised in the
United Kingdom are entirely voluntary, both as regards the initiation
and conduct of the negotiations and the carrying out of the agreement
resulting therefrom, In all these respects arbitration, though
terminating in what is called a binding award, is on precisely the same
legal footing as conciliation, which results in a mutual agreement.
Various proposals have been made (and in some cases carried into effect
in certain countries) for introducing an element of compulsion into this
class of proceeding. There are three stages at which compulsion may
conceivably be introduced, (1) The parties may be compelled by law to
submit their dispute to some tribunal or board of conciliation; (2) the
board of conciliation or arbitration may have power to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents; (3) the parties
may be compelled to observe the award of the board of arbitration. The
most far-reaching schemes of compulsory arbitration in force in any
country are those in force in New Zealand and certain states in
Australia. Bills have been introduced into the British House of Commons
for clothing voluntary boards of conciliation and arbitration, under
certain conditions, with powers to require attendance of witnesses and
production of documents, without, however, compelling the parties to
submit their disputes to these boards or to abide by their decisions. In
the United Kingdom, however, more attention has recently been given to
the question of strengthening the sanction for the carrying out of
awards and agreements than of compelling the parties to enter into such
arrangements. An interesting step towards the solution of the difficulty
of enforcement in certain cases is perhaps afforded by the provisions of
the terms of settlement of the dispute in the boot and shoe trade drawn
up at the Board of Trade in 1895. Under this agreement £1000 was
deposited by each party with trustees, who were directed by the
trust-deed to pay over to either party, out of the money deposited by
the other, any sum which might be awarded as damages by the umpire named
in the deed, for the breach of the agreement or of any award made by an
arbitration board in consonance with it. Very few claims for damages
have been sustained under this agreement. Nevertheless it cannot be
doubted that the pecuniary liability of the parties has given stability
to the work of the local arbitration boards, and the satisfaction of
both sides with the arrangement is shown by the fact that the trust-deed
which lapsed in 1900 has been several times renewed by common agreement
for successive periods of two years, and is now in force for an
indefinite period subject to six months' notice from either side.
Theoretically a trust-deed of this kind can only offer a guarantee up to
the point at which the original deposit on one side or the other is
exhausted, as it is impossible to compel either party to renew the
deposit. A proposal was made by the duke of Devonshire and certain of
his colleagues on the Royal Commission on Labour for empowering
associations of employers and employed to acquire, if they desired it,
sufficient legal personality and corporate character to enable them to
sue each other or their own members for breach of agreement. This would
give the association aggrieved by a breach of award the power of suing
the defaulting organization to recover damages out of their corporate
funds, while each association could exact penalties from its members for
such a breach. For this reason the suggestion has met with a good deal
of support by many interested in arbitration and conciliation, but has
been steadily opposed by representatives of the trade unions.

The question is not free from difficulties. The object of the change
would be to convert what are at present only morally binding
understandings into legally enforceable contracts. But apart from the
possibility that some of such contracts would be held by the courts to
be void as being "in restraint of trade," the tendency might be to give
a strict legal interpretation to working agreements which might deprive
them of some of their effectiveness for the settlement of the conditions
of future contracts between employers and workmen, while possibly
deterring associations from entering into such agreements for fear of
litigation. Individuals, moreover, could avoid liability by leaving
their associations. In practice the cases of repudiation or breach of an
award or agreement are not common. In countries like New Zealand, where
the parties are compelled to submit their differences to arbitration,
some of the above objections do not apply.

  Statistics of existing agencies.

The following statistics are based on the reports of the Labour
department of the Board of Trade. The number of boards of conciliation
and arbitration known to be in existence in the United Kingdom is nearly
200, but a good many of these do little or no active work. Only about
one-third of these boards deal with actual cases in any one year, the
active boards being mainly connected with mining, iron and steel,
engineering and shipbuilding, boot and shoe and building trades. During
the ten years 1897-1906 the total number of cases considered by these
boards averaged about 1500 annually, of which they have settled about
half, the remainder having been withdrawn, referred back or otherwise
settled. About three-quarters of the cases settled were determined by
the boards themselves and only one-quarter by umpires. The great
majority of the cases settled were purely local questions. Thus more
than half the total were dealt with by the "joint committees" in the
Northumberland and Durham coal trades, which confine their action to
local questions, such as fixing the "hewing prices" for new seams. The
great majority of the cases settled did not actually involve stoppage of
work, the most useful work of these permanent boards being the
prevention rather than the settlement of strikes and lockouts. A certain
number of disputes are settled every year by the mediation or
arbitration of disinterested individuals, e.g. the local mayor or county
court judge.

  Future scope and limits.

The extent to which the methods of arbitration and conciliation can be
expected to afford a substitute for strikes and lockouts is one on which
opinions differ very widely. The difficulties arising from the
impossibility of enforcing agreements or awards by legal process have
already been discussed. Apart from these, however, it is evident that
both methods imply that the parties, especially the work-people, are
organized at least to the extent of being capable of negotiating through
agents. In some industries (e.g. agriculture or domestic service) this
preliminary condition is not satisfied; in others the men's leaders
possess little more than consultative powers, and employers may hesitate
to deal either directly or through a third party with individuals or
committees who have so little authority over those whom they claim to
represent. And even where the trade organizations are strong, some
employers refuse in any way to recognize the representative character of
the men's officials. The question of the "recognition" of trade unions
by employers is a frequent cause of disputes (see STRIKES AND
LOCK-OUTS.) It may be observed, however, that it often occurs that in
cases in which both employers and employed are organized into
associations which are accustomed to deal with each other, one or both
parties entertain a strong objection to the intervention of any outside
mediator, or to the submission of differences to an arbitrator. Thus the
engineering employers in 1897 were opposed to any outside intervention,
though ready to negotiate with the delegates chosen by the men. On the
other hand, the cotton operatives have more than once opposed the
proposal of the employers to refer the rate of wages to arbitration, and
throughout the great miners' dispute of 1893 the opposition to
arbitration came from the men. Naturally, the party whose organization
is the stronger is usually the less inclined to admit outside
intervention. But there have also been cases in which employers, who
refused to deal directly with trade union officials, have been willing
to negotiate with a mediator who was well known to be in communication
with these officials, e.g. in the case of the Railway Settlement of
1907.

Apart, however, from the disinclination of one or both parties to allow
of any outside intervention, we have to consider how far the nature of
the questions in dispute may in any particular case put limits to the
applicability of conciliation or arbitration as a method of settlement.
Since conciliation is only a general term for the action of a third
party in overcoming the obstacles to the conclusion of an agreement by
the parties themselves, there is no class of questions which admit of
settlement by direct negotiation which may not equally be settled by
this method, provided of course that there is an adequate supply of
sufficiently skilful mediators. As regards arbitration the case is
somewhat different, seeing that in this case the parties agree to be
bound by the award of a third party. For the success of arbitration,
therefore, it is important that the general principles which should
govern the settlement of the particular question at issue should be
admitted by both sides. Thus in the manufactured iron trade in the north
of England, it has throughout been understood that wages should depend
on the prices realized, and the only question which an arbitrator has
usually had to decide has been how far the state of prices at the time
warranted a particular change of wage. On the other hand, there are many
questions on which disputes arise (e.g. the employment of non-union
labour, the restriction of piece-work, &c.) on which there is frequently
no common agreement as to principles, and an arbitrator may be at a loss
to know what considerations he is to take into account in determining
his award. Generally speaking, employers are averse from submitting to a
third party questions involving discipline and the management of their
business, while in some trades workmen have shown themselves opposed to
allowing an arbitrator to reduce wages beyond a certain point which they
wish to regard as a guaranteed "minimum."

Another objection on the part of some employers and workmen to
unrestricted arbitration is its alleged tendency to multiply disputes by
providing an easy way of solving them without recourse to strikes or
lock-outs, and so diminishing the sense of responsibility in the party
advancing the claims. It is also sometimes contended that arbitrators,
not being governed in their decisions by a definite code of principles,
may tend to "split the difference," so as to satisfy both sides even
when the demands on one side or the other are wholly unwarranted. This,
it is said, encourages the formulation of demands purposely put high in
order to admit of being cut down by an arbitrator. One of the chief
practical difficulties in the way of the successful working of permanent
boards of conciliation, consisting of equal numbers of employers and
employed, with an umpire in case of deadlock, is the difficulty of
inducing business men whose time is fully occupied to devote the
necessary time to the work of the boards, especially when either side
has it in its power to compel recourse to the umpire, and so render the
work of the conciliation board fruitless. In spite of all these
difficulties the practice of arranging differences by conciliation and
arbitration is undoubtedly spreading, and it is to be remembered that
even in cases in which theoretically a basis for arbitration can
scarcely be said to exist, recourse to that method may often serve a
useful purpose in putting an end to a deadlock of which both parties are
tired, though neither cares to own itself beaten.

_New Zealand._--The New Zealand Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration
Act 1894 is important as the first practical attempt of any importance
to enforce compulsory arbitration in trade disputes. The original act
was amended by several subsequent measures, and the law has been more
than once consolidated. The law provides for the incorporation of
associations of employers or workmen under the title of industrial
unions, and for the creation in each district of a joint conciliation
board, elected by these industrial unions, with an impartial chairman
elected by the board, to which a dispute may be referred by any party, a
strike or lock-out being thenceforth illegal. If the recommendation of
the conciliation board is not accepted by either party, the matter goes
to a court of arbitration consisting of two persons representing
employers and workmen respectively, and a judge of the supreme court. Up
to 1901 disputes were ordinarily required to go first to a board of
conciliation except by agreement of the parties, but now either party
may carry a dispute direct to the arbitration court. The amendment was
adopted because it was found in practice that the great majority of
cases went ultimately to the arbitration court, and conciliation board
proceedings were often mere waste of time. The award of the court is
enforceable by legal process, financial penalties up to £500 being
recoverable from defaulting associations or individuals. If the property
of an association is insufficient to pay the penalty, its members are
individually liable up to £10 each. It is the duty of factory inspectors
to see that awards are obeyed. The law provides for the extension of
awards to related trades, to employers entering the industry hereafter,
and in some cases to a whole industry.

The above is only an outline of the principal provisions of this law,
under which questions of wages, hours and the relations of employers and
workmen generally in New Zealand (q.v.) industries became practically
the subject of state regulation. The act must more properly be judged as
a measure for the state regulation of industry, but as a method of
putting an end to labour disputes its success has only been partial.

_Australia._--The laws which are practically operative in Australia with
respect to arbitration and conciliation are all based with modifications
on the New Zealand system. The first compulsory arbitration act passed
in Australia was the New South Wales Act of 1901. The principal points
of difference between this and the New Zealand act are that the
conciliation procedure is entirely omitted, the New South Wales measure
being purely an arbitration act. The arbitration court has greater power
over unorganized trades than in New Zealand, and the scope of its awards
is greatly enlarged by its power to declare any condition of labour to
be common rule of an industry, and thus binding on all existing and
future employers and work-people in that industry. In Western Australia
laws were passed in 1900 and 1902 which practically adopted the New
Zealand legislation with certain modifications in detail.

In 1904 the commonwealth of Australia passed a compulsory arbitration
law based mainly on those in force in New Zealand and New South Wales,
and applicable to disputes affecting more than one Australian state. The
arbitration court is empowered to require any dispute within its
cognizance to be referred to it by the state authority proposing to deal
with it. There are other Australian laws which, though unrepealed (e.g.
the South Australian Act of 1894), are a dead-letter. Generally
speaking, the Australasian laws on arbitration and conciliation are more
stringent and far-reaching than any others in the world.

_Canada._--In 1900 a conciliation act was passed by the Dominion
parliament resembling the United Kingdom act in most of its features,
and in 1903 the Canadian Railway Labour Disputes Act made special
provision for the reference of railway disputes to a conciliation board
and (failing settlement) to a court of arbitration.

This act was consolidated with the Conciliation Act 1900 during 1906 in
an act respecting conciliation and labour, and in March 1907 the
Industrial Disputes Investigation Act became law by which machinery is
set up for the constitution of a board, on the application of either
side to a dispute in mines and industries connected with public
utilities, whenever a strike involving more than ten employees is
threatened. The provisions of the act may be extended to other
industries and railway companies, and their employees may take action
under either the Conciliation and Labour Act or the Industrial Disputes
Investigation Act. Under the Investigation Act it is unlawful for any
employer to cause a lock-out, or for an employee to go on strike on
account of any dispute prior to or during a reference of such dispute to
a board constituted under the act, or prior to or during a reference
under the provisions concerning railway disputes under the Conciliation
and Labour Act. There is nothing, however, in the act to prevent a
strike or lock-out taking place after the dispute has been investigated.

_France._--The French Conciliation and Arbitration Law of December 1892
provides that either party to a labour dispute may apply to the _juge de
paix_ of the canton, who informs the other party of the application. If
they concur within three days, a joint committee of conciliation is
formed of not more than five representatives of each party, which meets
in the presence of the _juge de paix_, who, however, has no vote. If no
agreement results the parties are invited to appoint arbitrators. If
such arbitrators are appointed and cannot agree on an umpire, the
president of the civil tribunal appoints an umpire. In the case of an
actual strike, in the absence of an application from either party it is
the duty of the _juge de paix_ to invite the parties to proceed to
conciliation or arbitration. The results of the action of the _juge de
paix_ and of the conciliation committee are placarded by the mayors of
the communes affected. The law leaves the parties entirely free to
accept or reject the services of the _juge de paix_.

During the ten years 1897-1906 the act was put in force in 1809
cases--viz. 916 on application of workmen; 49 of employers; 40 of both
sides; and 804 without application. Altogether 616 disputes were
settled--549 by conciliation and 67 by arbitration.

_Germany._--In several continental European countries, courts or boards
are established by law to settle cases arising out of existing labour
contracts; e.g. the French "_Conseils de Prud'hommes_," the Italian
"_Probi-Viri_," and the German "_Gewerbegerichten_,"--and some of the
questions which come before these bodies are such as might be dealt with
in England by voluntary boards or joint committees. The majority,
however, are disputes between individuals as to wages due, &c., which
would be determined in the United Kingdom by a court of summary
jurisdiction. It is noteworthy, however, that the German industrial
courts (_Gewerbegerichten_) are empowered under certain conditions to
offer their services to mediate between the parties to an ordinary
labour dispute. The main law is that of 1890 which was amended in 1901.
In the case of a strike or lock-out the court must intervene on
application of both parties, and may do so of its own initiative or on
the invitation of one side. The conciliation board for this purpose
consists under the amending law of 1901 of the president of the court
and four or more representatives named by the parties in equal numbers
but not concerned in the dispute. Failing appointment by the parties the
president appoints them. Failing a settlement at a conference between
the parties in the presence of the president and assessors of the court,
the court arrives at a decision on the merits of the dispute which is
communicated to the parties, who are allowed a certain time within which
to notify their acceptance or rejection. The court has no power to
compel the observance of its decision, but in certain cases it may fine
a witness for non-attendance. In the first five years after the passage
of the amending law of 1901 (viz. 1902-1906) there were 1139
applications for the intervention of the industrial courts: 492
agreements were brought about and 107 decisions were pronounced by the
courts, of which 64 were accepted by both parties.

_Switzerland._--The canton of Geneva enacted a law in 1900 providing for
the settlement by negotiation, conciliation or arbitration of the
general terms of employment in a trade, subject, however, to special
arrangements between employers and workmen in particular cases. The
negotiations take place between delegates chosen by the associations of
employers and employed, or failing them, by meetings summoned by the
council of state on sufficient applications. Failing settlement, the
council of state, on application from either party, is to appoint one or
more conciliators from its members, and if this fail the central
committee of the _Prud'hommes_, together with the delegates of employers
and workmen, is to form a board of arbitration, whose decision is
binding. Any collective suspension of work is illegal during the period
covered by the award or agreement. Up to the end of 1904 only seven
cases occurred of application of the law to industrial differences. In
Basel (town) a law providing for voluntary conciliation by means of
boards of employers and workmen with an independent chairman appointed
_ad hoc_ by the council of state of the canton, has been in force since
1897, but it remained practically unused until 1902. In the period from
January 1902 to May 1905, 18 disputes were dealt with and 10 settled
under this law. A similar law was adopted in St Gall in 1902. In the
three years 1902-1904, 10 disputes were dealt with and 3 settled.

_Sweden._--By a law which came into force on the 1st of January 1907,
Sweden was divided into seven districts and in each district a
conciliator was appointed by the crown. The conciliator must reside
within his district and his principal duty is to promote the settlement
of disputes between employers and work-people or between members of
either class among themselves. He is also on request to advise and
otherwise assist employers and work-people in framing agreements
affecting the conditions of labour if and so far as agreements are
designed to promote good relations between the two classes and to
obviate stoppages of work.

_United States._--In the United States several states have legislated on
the subject of conciliation and arbitration, among the first of such
acts being the "Wallace" Act of 1883, in Pennsylvania, which, however,
was almost inoperative. Altogether, 24 states have made constitutional
or statutory provision for mediation in trade disputes, of which 17
contemplate the formation of permanent state boards. The only state laws
which require notice are those of Massachusetts and New York providing
for the formation of state boards of arbitration. The Massachusetts
board, founded in 1886, consists of one employer, one employed and one
independent person chosen by both. The New York board (1886) consists of
two representatives of different political parties, and one member of a
_bona fide_ trade organization within the state. In both states it is
the duty of the board, with or without application from the parties, to
proceed to the spot where a labour dispute has occurred, and to
endeavour to promote a settlement. The parties may decline its services,
but the board is empowered to issue a report, and on application from
either side to hold an inquiry and publish its decision, which (in
Massachusetts) is binding for six months, unless sixty days' notice to
the contrary is given by one side to the other. Several states,
including Massachusetts and New York, provide not only for state boards,
but also for local boards.

In Massachusetts, during 1906, the state board dealt with 158 disputes.
Of these the board was appealed to as arbitrator in 95 cases. Awards
were rendered in 80 cases, 12 cases were withdrawn and 3 cases were
still pending at the end of the year. In New York the number of cases
dealt with is much smaller.

Federal legislation can only touch the question of arbitration and
conciliation so far as regards disputes affecting commerce between
different states. Thus an act of June 1898 provides that in a dispute
involving serious interruption of business on railways engaged in
inter-state commerce, the chairman of the Inter-State Commerce
Commission and the commissioner of labour shall, on application of
either party, endeavour to effect a settlement, or to induce the parties
to submit the dispute to arbitration. While an arbitration under the act
is pending a strike or lock-out is unlawful.

  AUTHORITIES.--For the recent development of arbitration and
  conciliation in the United Kingdom, see the _Annual Reports of the
  Labour Department of the Board of Trade on Strikes and Lock-outs_ from
  1888 onwards. Since 1890 these reports have contained special
  appendices on the work of arbitration boards. See also the _Labour
  Gazette_ (the monthly journal of the Labour Department) from 1893
  onward, and the _Report on Rules of Voluntary Conciliation and
  Arbitration Boards and Joint Committees_. The _Reports of the Royal
  Commission on Labour_ (1891-1894) contain much valuable information on
  the subject. For the working of the Conciliation Act see the _Reports_
  of the Board of Trade on their proceedings under the Conciliation Act
  1896. For the earlier history in the United Kingdom: Crompton,
  _Industrial Conciliation_ (1876); Price, _Industrial Peace_ (1887).
  For foreign and colonial developments: the third _Abstract of Foreign
  Labour Statistics_ (1906), issued by the Board of Trade; _Report on
  Government Industrial Arbitration_, by L.W. Hatch (Bulletin of Bureau
  of Labour of United States Department of Commerce and Labour,
  September 1905); the report of the French _Office du Travail_, _De la
  conciliation et de l'arbitrage dans les conflits collectifs entre
  patrons et ouvriers en France et à l'étranger_ (1893); the Annual
  Reports of the same Department on _Strikes, Lockouts and Arbitration_;
  the _Reports of the Massachusetts and New York State Arbitration
  Boards_, and of the _New Zealand Department of Labour_; and the
  _Labour Gazette_. See also the following general works: N.P. Gilman,
  _Methods of Industrial Peace_ (Boston, 1904); A.C. Pigou, _Principles
  and Methods of Industrial Peace_ (1905).     (X.)