ARBORETUM, the name given to that part of a garden or park which is
reserved for the growth and display of trees. The term, in this
restricted sense, was seemingly first so employed in 1838 by J.C.
Loudon, in his book upon arboreta and fruit trees. Professor Bayley
Balfour, F.R.S., the Regius Keeper of the Royal Botanic Garden in
Edinburgh, has described an arboretum as a living collection of species
and varieties of trees and shrubs arranged after some definite
method--it may be properties, or uses, or some other principle--but
usually after that of natural likeness. The plants are intended to be
specimens showing the habit of the tree or shrub, and the collection is
essentially an educational one. According to another point of view, an
arboretum should be constructed with regard to picturesque beauty rather
than systematically, although it is admitted that for scientific
purposes a systematic arrangement is a _sine qua non_. In this more
general respect, an arboretum or woodland affords shelter, improves
local climate, renovates bad soils, conceals objects unpleasing to the
eye, heightens the effect of what is agreeable and graceful, and adds
value, artistic and other, to the landscape. What Loudon called the
"gardenesque" school of landscape naturally makes particular use of
trees. By common consent the arboretum in the Royal Botanical Gardens at
Kew is one of the finest in the world. Its beginnings may be traced back
to 1762, when, at the suggestion of Lord Bute, the duke of Argyll's
trees and shrubs were removed from Whitton Place, near Hounslow, to
adorn the princess of Wales's garden at Kew. The duke's collection was
famous for its cedars, pines and firs. Most of the trees of that date
have perished, but the survivors embrace some of the finest of their
kind in the gardens. The botanical gardens at Kew were thrown open to
the public in 1841 under the directorate of Sir William Hooker.
Including the arboretum, their total area did not then exceed 11 acres.
Four years later the pleasure grounds and gardens at Kew occupied by the
king of Hanover were given to the nation and placed under the care of
Sir William for the express purpose of being converted into an
arboretum. Hooker rose to the occasion and, zealously reinforced by his
son and successor, Sir Joseph, established a collection which rapidly
grew in richness and importance. It is perhaps the largest collection of
hardy trees and shrubs known, comprising some 4500 species and botanical
varieties. A large proportion of the total acreage (288) of the Gardens
is monopolized by the arboretum. Of the more specialized public arboreta
in the United Kingdom the next to Kew are those in the Royal Botanic
Garden in Edinburgh and the Glasnevin Garden in Dublin. The collection
of trees in the Botanic Garden at Cambridge is also one of respectable
proportions. There is a small but very select collection of trees at
Oxford, the oldest botanical garden in Great Britain, which was founded
in 1632. In the United States the Arnold Arboretum at Boston ranks with
Kew for size and completeness. It takes its name from its donor, the
friend of Emerson. It was originally a well-timbered park, which, by
later additions, now covers 222 acres. Practically, it forms part of the
park system so characteristic of the city, being situated only 4 m. from
the centre of population. There is a fine arboretum in the botanical
gardens at Ottawa, in Canada (65 acres). On the continent of Europe the
classic example is still the _Jardin des Plantes_ in Paris, where,
however, system lends more of formality than of beauty to the general
effect. The collection of trees and shrubs at Schönbrunn, near Vienna,
is an extensive one. At Dahlem near Berlin the new _Kgl. Neuer
Botanischer Garten_ has been laid out with a view to the accommodation
of a very large collection of hardy trees and shrubs. There are now many
large collections of hardy trees and shrubs in private parks and gardens
throughout the British Islands, the interest taken in them by their
proprietors having largely increased in recent years. Rich men collect
trees, as they do paintings or books. They spare neither pains nor money
in acquiring specimens, even from distant lands, to which they often
send out expert collectors at their own expense. This, too, the Royal
Horticultural Society was once wont to do, with valuable results, as in
the case of David Douglas's remarkable expedition to North America in
1823-1824. It will be remembered that when the laird of Dumbiedikes lay
dying (Scott's _Heart of Midlothian_, chap, viii.) he gave his son one
bit of advice which Bacon himself could not have bettered. "Jock," said
the old reprobate, "when ye hae naething else to do; ye may be aye
sticking in a tree; it will be growing, Jock, when ye're sleeping." Sir
Walter assures us that a Scots earl took this maxim so seriously to
heart that he planted a large tract of country with trees, a practice
which in these days is promoted by the English and Royal Scottish
Arboricultural Societies.