ARBORICULTURE (Lat. _arbor_, a tree), the science and art of
tree-cultivation. The culture of those plants which supply the food of
man or nourish the domestic animals must have exclusively occupied his
attention for many ages; whilst the timber employed in houses, ships and
machines, or for fuel, was found in the native woods. Hence, though the
culture of fruit-trees, and occasionally of ornamental trees and shrubs,
was practised by the Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, the cultivation of
timber-trees on a large scale only took place in modern times. In the
days of Charlemagne, the greater part of France and Germany was covered
with immense forests; and one of the benefits conferred on France by
that prince was the rooting up of portions of these forests throughout
the country, and substituting orchards or vineyards. Artificial
plantations appear to have been formed in Germany sooner than in any
other country, apparently as early as the 15th century. In Britain
planting was begun, though sparingly, a century later. After the
extensive transfers of property on the seizure of the church lands by
Henry VIII., much timber was sold by the new owners, and the quantity
thus thrown into the market so lowered its price, as Hollingshed informs
us, that the builders of cottages, who had formerly employed willow and
other cheap and common woods, now built them of the best oak. The demand
for timber constantly increased, and the need of an extended surface of
arable land arising at the same time, the natural forests became greatly
circumscribed, till at last timber began to be imported, and the
proprietors of land to think, first of protecting their native woods,
afterwards of enclosing waste ground and allowing it to become covered
with self-sown seedlings, and ultimately of sowing acorns and mast in
such enclosures, or of filling them with young plants collected in the
woods--a practice which exists in Sussex and other parts of England even
now. Planting, however, was not general in England till the beginning of
the 17th century, when the introduction of trees was facilitated by the
interchange of plants by means of botanic gardens, which, in that
century, were first established in different countries. Evelyn's
_Sylva_, the first edition of which appeared in 1664, rendered an
extremely important service to arboriculture; and there is no doubt that
the ornamental plantations in which England surpasses all other
countries are in some measure the result of his enthusiasm. In
consequence of a scarcity of timber for naval purposes, and the
increased expense during the Napoleonic war of obtaining foreign
supplies, planting received a great stimulus in Britain in the early
part of the 19th century. After the peace of 1815 the rage for planting
with a view to profit subsided; but there was a growing taste for the
introduction of trees and shrubs from foreign countries, and for their
cultivation for ornament and use. The profusion of trees and shrubs
planted around suburban villas and country mansions, as well as in town
squares and public parks, shows how much arboriculture is an object of
pleasure to the people. While isolated trees and old hedgerows are
disappearing before steam cultivation, the advantages of shelter from
well-arranged plantations are more fully appreciated; and more attention
is paid to the principles of forest conservancy both at home and abroad.
In all thickly peopled countries the forests have long ceased to supply
the necessities of the inhabitants by natural reproduction; and it has
become needful to form plantations either by government or by private
enterprise, for the growth of timber, and in some cases for climatic
amelioration. This subject is, however, dealt with more fully under
FORESTS AND FORESTRY (q.v.); and the separate articles on the various
sorts of tree may be consulted for details as to each.