ARBOGAST (d. 394), a barbarian officer in the Roman army, at the end of
the 4th century. His nationality is uncertain, but Zosimus, Eunapius and
Sulpicius Alexander (a Gallo-Roman historian quoted by Gregory of Tours)
all refer to him as a Frank. Having served with distinction against the
Goths in Thrace, he was sent by Theodosius in 388 against Maximus, who
had usurped the empire of the west and had murdered Gratian. His
complete success, which resulted in the destruction of Maximus and his
sons and the pacification of Gaul, led Theodosius to appoint him chief
minister for his young brother-in-law Valentinian II. His rule was most
energetic; but while he favoured the barbarians in the imperial service,
and appointed them to high office, Valentinian, openly jealous of his
minister, sought to surround himself with Romans. As an offset to this,
Arbogast allied himself with the pagan element in Rome, while
Valentinian was strictly orthodox. In 392 Valentinian was secretly put
to death at Vienne (in Gaul), and Arbogast, naming as his successor
Eugenius, a rhetorician, descended into Italy to meet the expedition
which Theodosius was heading against him. He proclaimed himself the
champion of the old Roman gods, and as a response to the appeal of
Ambrose, is said to have threatened to stable his horses in the
cathedral of Milan, and to force the monks to fight in his army. His
defeat in the hard-fought battle of the Frigidus saved Italy from these
dangers. Theodosius, after a two days' fight, gained the victory by the
treachery of one of Arbogast's generals, sent to cut off his retreat.
Eugenius was captured and executed, but Arbogast escaped to the
mountains, where however he slew himself three days afterwards (8th of
September 394). Although we have only most distorted narratives upon
which to rely--pagan eulogy and Christian denunciation--Arbogast appears
to have been one of the greatest soldiers of the later empire, and a
statesman of no mean rank. His energy, and his apparent disdain for the
effete civilization which he protected, but which did not affect his
character, make his personality one of the most interesting of the 4th
century.

  See T. Hodgkin, _Italy and her Invaders_ (1880), vol. i. chap. ii.