ARBUTHNOT, JOHN (1667-1735), British physician and author, was born at
Arbuthnott, Kincardineshire, and baptized on the 29th of April 1667. His
father, Alexander Arbuthnot, was an episcopalian minister who was
deprived of his living in 1689 by his patron, Viscount Arbuthnott, for
refusing to conform to the Presbyterian system. After his death, in
1691, John went to London, where he lived in the house of a learned
linen-draper, William Pate, and supported himself by teaching
mathematics. In 1692 he published _Of the Laws of Chance_ ..., based on
the Latin version, _De Ratociniis in ludo aleae_, of a Dutch treatise by
Christiaan Huygens. In 1692 he entered University College, Oxford, as a
fellow-commoner, acting as private tutor to Edward Jefferys; and in 1696
he graduated M.D. at St Andrews university. In _An Examination of Dr
Woodward's Account of the Deluge_ (1697) he confuted an extraordinary
theory advanced by Dr William Woodward. An _Essay on the Usefulness of
Mathematical Learning_ followed in 1701, and in 1704 he became a fellow
of the Royal Society. He had the good fortune to be called in at Epsom
to prescribe for Prince George of Denmark, and in 1705 he was made
physician extraordinary to Queen Anne. Four years later he became royal
physician in ordinary, and in 1710 he was elected fellow of the Royal
College of Physicians. Arbuthnot's ready wit and varied learning made
him very valuable to the Tory party. He was a close friend of Jonathan
Swift and of Alexander Pope, and Lord Chesterfield says that even the
generous acknowledgment they made of his assistance fell short of their
real indebtedness. He had no jealousy of his fame as an author, and his
abundant imagination was always at the service of his friends. In 1712
appeared "Law is a Bottomless Pit, Exemplify'd in the case of the Lord
Strutt, John Bull, Nicholas Frog and Lewis Baboon, who spent all they
had in a law-suit. Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the
famous Sir Humphrey Polesworth." This was the first of a series of five
pamphlets advocating the conclusion of peace. Arbuthnot describes the
confusion after the death of the Lord Strutt (Charles II. of Spain), and
the quarrels between the greedy tradespeople (the allies). These put
their cause into the hands of the attorney, Humphrey Hocus (the duke of
Marlborough), who does all he can to prolong the struggle. The five
tracts are printed in two parts as the "History of John Bull" in the
_Miscellanies in Prose and Verse_ (1727, preface signed by Pope and
Swift). Arbuthnot fixed the popular conception of John Bull, though it
is not certain that he originated the character, and the lively satire
is still amusing reading. It was often asserted at the time that Swift
wrote these pamphlets, but both he and Pope refer to Arbuthnot as the
sole author. In the autumn of the same year he published a second
satire, "Proposals for printing a very Curious Discourse in Two Volumes
in Quarto, entitled, [Greek: Psendologia Politikae]; or, A Treatise of
the Art of Political Lying," best known by its sub-title. This ironical
piece of work was not so popular as "John Bull." "'Tis very pretty,"
says Swift, "but not so obvious to be understood." Arbuthnot advises
that a lie should not be contradicted by the truth, but by another
judicious lie. "So there was not long ago a gentleman, who affirmed that
the treaty with France for bringing popery and slavery into England was
signed the 15th of September, to which another answered very
judiciously, not by opposing truth to his lie, that there was no such
treaty; but that, to his certain knowledge, there were many things in
that treaty not yet adjusted."

Arbuthnot was one of the leading spirits in the Scriblerus Club, the
members of which were to collaborate in a universal satire on the abuses
of learning. _The Memoirs of the extraordinary Life, Works, and
Discoveries of Martinus Scriblerus_, of which only the first book was
finished, first printed in Pope's _Works_ (1741), was chiefly the work
of Arbuthnot, who is at his best in the whimsical account of the birth
and education of Martin. Swift, writing on the 3rd of July 1714 to
Arbuthnot, says:--"To talk of Martin in any hands but yours, is a folly.
You every day give better hints than all of us together could do in a
twelvemonth: and to say the truth, Pope who first thought of the hint
has no genius at all to it, to my mind; Gay is too young: Parnell has
some ideas of it, but is idle; I could put together, and lard, and
strike out well enough, but all that relates to the sciences must be
from you."

The death of Queen Anne put an end to Arbuthnot's position at court, but
he still had an extensive practice, and in 1727 he delivered the
Harveian oration before the Royal College of Physicians. Lord
Chesterfield and William Pulteney were his patients and friends; also
Mrs Howard (Lady Suffolk) and William Congreve. His friendship with
Swift was constant and intimate; he was friend and adviser to Gay; and
Pope wrote (2nd of August 1734) that in a friendship of twenty years he
had found no one reason of complaint from him. Arbuthnot's youngest son,
who had just completed his education, died in December 1731. He never
quite recovered his former spirits and health after this shock. On the
17th of July 1734 he wrote to Pope: "A recovery in my case, and at my
age, is impossible; the kindest wish of my friends is Euthanasia." In
January 1735 was published the "Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot," which forms
the prologue to Pope's satires. He died on the 27th of February 1735 at
his house in Cork Street, London.

Among Arbuthnot's other works are:--_An Argument for Divine Providence,
taken from the constant regularity observed in the Births of both sexes_
(Phil. Trans. of the Royal Soc., 1710); "Virgilius Restauratus," printed
in the second edition of Pope's _Dunciad_ (1729); _An Essay concerning
the Effects of Air on Human Bodies_ (1733); _An Essay concerning the
Nature of Ailments_ ... (1731); and a valuable _Table of Ancient Coins,
Weights and Measures_ (1727), which is an enlargement of an earlier
treatise (1705). He had a share in the unsuccessful farce of _Three
Hours after Marriage_, printed with Gay's name on the title-page (1717).
Some pieces printed in _A Supplement to Dr Swift's and Mr Pope's
Works_ ... (1739) are there asserted to be Arbuthnot's. _The
Miscellaneous Works of the late Dr Arbuthnot_ were published at Glasgow
in an unauthorized edition in 1751. This includes many spurious pieces.

  See _The Life and Works of John Arbuthnot_ (1892), by George A.
  Aitken.