ARCADE, in architecture, a range of arches, supported either by columns
or piers; isolated in the case of those separating the nave of a church
from the aisles, or forming the front of a covered ambulatory, as in the
cloisters in Italy and Sicily, round the Ducal Palace or the Square of
St Mark's, Venice, round the courts of the palaces in Italy, or in Paris
round the Palais-Royal and the Place des Vosges. The earliest examples
known are those of the Tabularium, the theatre of Marcellus, and the
Colosseum, in Rome. In the palace of Diocletian at Spalato the principal
street had an arcade on either side, the arches of which rested direct
on the capital without any intervening entablature or impost block. The
term is also applied to the galleries, employed decoratively, on the
façades of the Italian churches, and carried round the apses where they
are known as eaves-galleries. Sometimes these arcades project from the
wall sufficiently to allow of a passage behind, and sometimes they are
built into and form part of the wall; in the latter case, they are known
as blind or wall arcades; and they were constantly employed to decorate
the lower part of the walls of the aisles and the choir-aisles in
English churches. Externally, blind arcades are more often found in
Italy and Sicily, but there are examples in England at Canterbury, Ely,
Peterborough, Norwich, St John's (Chester), Colchester and elsewhere.
Internally, the oldest example is that of the old refectory in
Westminster Abbey (fig. 1). Sometimes the design is varied with
interlacing arches as in St John's Devizes (fig. 2), and Beverley
Minster (fig. 3). In Sicily and the south of Italy these interlacing
arcades are the special characteristic of the Saracenic work there
found, and their origin may be found in the interlaced arches of the
Mosque of Cordova in Spain. In the cathedral of Palermo and at Monreale
they are carried round the apses at the east end. At Caserta-Vecchia, in
South Italy, they decorate the lantern over the crossing, and at Amain
the turrets on the north-west campanile.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Arcade, Westminster Abbey.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Arcade, St John's, Devizes.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Triforium at Beverley.

From Rickman's _Styles of Architecture_, by permission of Parker & Co.]

The term is also applied to the covered passages which form
thoroughfares from one street to another, as in the Burlington Arcade,
London; in Paris such an arcade is usually called _passage_, and in
Italy _galleria_.     (R. P. S.)