ARCADIA, a district of Greece, forming the central plateau of
Peloponnesus. Shut off from the coast lands on all sides by mountain
barriers, which rise in the northernpeaks of Erymanthus (mod. _Olonos_)
to 7400, of Cyllene (Ziria) to 7900, in the southern corner buttresses
of Parthenium and Lycaeum to more than 5000 ft., this inland plateau is
again divided by numerous subsidiary ranges. In eastern or "locked"
Arcadia these heights run in parallel courses intersected by
cross-ridges, enclosing a series of upland plains whose waters have no
egress save by underground channels or _zerethra_. The western country
is more open, with isolated mountain-groups and winding valleys, where
the Alpheus with its tributaries the Ladon and Erymanthus drains off in
a complex river-system the overflow from all Arcadia. The ancient
inhabitants were a nation of shepherds and huntsmen, worshipping Pan,
Hermes and Artemis, primitive nature-deities. The difficulties of
communication and especially the lack of a seaboard seriously hindered
intercourse with the rest of Greece. Consequently the same population,
whose origins Greek tradition removed back into the world's earliest
days, held the land throughout historic times, without even an admixture
of Dorian immigrants. Their customs and dialect persisted, the latter
maintaining a peculiar resemblance to that of the equally conservative
Cypriotes. Thus Arcadia lagged behind the general development of Greece,
and its political importance was small owing to chronic feuds between
the townships (notably between Mantineia and Tegea) and the readiness of
its youth for mercenary service abroad.

The importance of Arcadia in Greek history was due to its position
between Sparta and the Isthmus. Unable to force their way through
Argolis, the Lacedaemonians early set themselves to secure the passage
through the central plateau. The resistance of single cities, and the
temporary union of the Arcadians during the second Messenian war, did
not defer the complete subjugation of the land beyond the 6th century.
In later times revolts were easily stirred up among individual cities,
but a united national movement was rarely concerted. Most of these
rebellions were easily quelled by Sparta, though in 469 and again in 420
the disaffected cities, backed by Argos, formed a dangerous coalition
and came near to establishing their independence. A more whole-hearted
attempt at union in 371 after the battle of Leuctra resulted in the
formation of a political league out of an old religious synod, and the
foundation of a federal capital in a commanding strategic position (see
MEGALOPOLIS). But a severe defeat at the hands of Sparta in 368 (the
"tearless battle") and the recrudescence of internal discord soon
paralysed this movement. The new fortress of Megalopolis, instead of
supplying a centre of national life, merely accentuated the mutual
jealousy of the cities. During the Hellenistic age Megalopolis stood
staunchly by Macedonia; the rest of Arcadia rebelled against Antipater
(330, 323) and Antigonus Gonatas (266). Similarly the various cities
were divided in their allegiance between the Achaean and the Aetolian
leagues, with the result that Arcadia became the battleground of these
confederacies, or fell a prey to Sparta and Macedonia. These conflicts
seem to have worn out the land, which already in Roman times had fallen
into decay. An influx of Slavonic settlers in the 8th century A.D.
checked the depopulation for a while, but Arcadia suffered severely from
the constant quarrels of its Frankish barons (1205-1460). The succeeding
centuries of Turkish rule, combined with an Albanian immigration, raised
the prosperity of the land, but in the Wars of Independence the
strategic importance of Arcadia once more made it a centre of conflict.
In modern times the population remains sparse, and pending the complete
restoration of the water conduits the soil is unproductive. The modern
department of Arcadia extends to the Gulf of Nauplia with a sea-coast of
about 40 m.

  AUTHORITIES.--Strabo pp. 388 sq.; Pausanias viii.; W.M. Leake,
  _Travels in the Morea_ (London, 1830), chs. iii., iv., xi.-xviii.,
  xxiii.-xxvi.; E. Curtius, _Peloponnesos_ (Gotha, 1851), i. 153-178;
  H.F. Tozer, _Geography of Greece_ (London, 1873), pp. 287-292; E.A.
  Freeman, _Federal Government_ (ed. 1893, London), ch. iv. § 3; B.V.
  Head, _Historia Numorum_ (Oxford, 1887), pp. 372-373; B. Niese in
  _Hermes_ (1899), pp. 520 f.     (M. O. B. C.)