ARCADIUS (378-408), Roman emperor, the elder son of Theodosius the
Great, was created Augustus in 383, and succeeded his father in 395
along with his brother Honorius. The empire was divided between them,
Honorius governing the two western prefectures (Gaul and Italy),
Arcadius the two eastern (the Orient and Illyricum). Both were feeble,
and, in Gibbon's phrase, slumbered on their thrones, leaving the
government to others. Arcadius submitted at first to the guidance of the
praetorian prefect Rufinus, and, after his murder (end of 395) by the
troops, to the counsels of the eunuch Eutropius (executed end of 399).
His consort Eudoxia (daughter of a Frank general, Bauto), a woman of
strong will, exercised great influence over him; she died in 404. In the
last year of his reign, Anthemius (praetorian prefect) was the chief
adviser and support of the throne. The first years of the reign were
marked by the ravaging of the Greek peninsula by the West Goths under
Alaric (q.v.) in 395-396. The movement of the Goth Gainas (who held the
post of master of soldiers) in 399-400 is less famous but was more
dangerous. At that time there were two rival political parties at
Constantinople, the "Roman" party led by Aurelian (son of Taurus),
praetorian prefect, and supported by the empress and a Germanizing and
Arianizing party led by Aurelian's brother (possibly Caesarius,
praetorian prefect in 400). Gainas entered into a close league with the
latter; fomented a Gothic rebellion in Phrygia; and forced the emperor
to put Eutropius to death. For some months he and the party which he
supported were supreme in Constantinople. He was, however, finally
forced to leave, and having plundered for some time in Thrace was
captured and killed by the loyal Goth Fravitta. The Roman party
recovered its power; Aurelian was again praetorian prefect in 402; and
the Germanization which was to befall the western world was averted from
the east. Another important question was decided in this reign, the
relation of the patriarch of Constantinople to the emperor. The struggle
between the court and the patriarch John Chrysostom (q.v.), who assumed
an independent attitude and gravely offended the empress by his sermons
against the worldliness and frivolity of the court, with open allusions
to herself, resulted in his fall and exile (404). This virtually
determined the subordination of the patriarch of Constantinople to the
emperor. The rivalry of the see of Alexandria with Constantinople was
also displayed in the contest, Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria,
assisting the court in bringing about the fall of Chrysostom. Throughout
the reign of Arcadius there was estrangement and jealousy between the
two brothers or their governments. The principal ground of this
hostility was probably dissatisfaction on both sides with the
territorial partition. The line had been drawn east of Dalmatia. The
ministers of Arcadius desired to annex Dalmatia to his portion, while
the general Stilicho, who was supreme in the west, wished to wrest from
the eastern realm the prefecture of Illyricum or a considerable part of
it. His designs were unsuccessful, and during the reign of Theodosius
II., son of Arcadius (who died in 408), Dalmatia was transferred to the
dominion of the eastern ruler.

  AUTHORITIES.--Ancient: Fragments of Eunapius and Olympiodorus (in
  Müller's _Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum_, vol. iv.); fragments of
  Philostorgius, Socrates, Sozomen, Zosimus, Synesius of Cyrene ("The
  Egyptian"), Claudian. Modern: Gibbon's _Decline and Fall_, vol. iii.,
  ed. Bury; J.B. Bury, _Later Roman Empire_, vol. i. (1889); T. Hodgkin,
  _Italy and her Invaders_, vol. i. (ed. 2, 1892); Güldenpenning,
  _Geschichte des ostromischen Reiches unter den Kaisern Arcadius und
  Theodosius II._ (1885).