ARCHEAN SYSTEM (from [Greek: archae], beginning), in geology. Below the
lowest distinctly fossiliferous strata, that is, below those Cambrian
rocks which bear the _Olenellus_ fauna, there lies a great mass of
stratified, metamorphic and igneous rock, to which the non-committal
epithet "pre-Cambrian" is often applied; and indeed in not a few
instances this general term is sufficiently precise for the present
state of our knowledge. Nevertheless there are large tracts, both in the
Old World and in the New, in which a subdivision of this assemblage of
ancient rocks is not only possible but desirable. It is quite clear in
certain regions that there is a lowermost group with a prevailing
granitoid, gneissic and schistose facies, mainly of igneous origin,
above which there are one or several groups bearing a distinctly
sedimentary aspect. It is to this lowermost gneissic group that the term
"Archean" may be conveniently limited.

[Illustration: Distribution of Archean Rocks.]

Thus, while the name "pre-Cambrian" may be used to indicate all these
very old rocks whenever there is still any difficulty in subdividing
them further, it is an advantage to have a special appellation for the
oldest group where this can be distinguished.

It must be pointed out that the term "Archean" has been used as a
synonym for pre-Cambrian; and that the expressions _Azoic_ (from
[alpha]-, privative; [Greek: zoae], life), _Eozoic_ (from [Greek: aeos],
dawn), and _Fundamental Complex_, have been employed in somewhat the
same sense. _Archeozoic_ has been proposed by American writers to apply
to the lowest pre-Cambrian rocks with the same significance as "Archean"
in the restricted sense employed here; but it is perhaps safer to avoid
any reference to the supposed stage of life development where all direct
evidence is non-existent. The so-called "Azoic" rocks have already been
made to yield evidence of life, and there is no reason to presuppose the
impossibility of finding other records of still earlier organisms.

The prevailing rocks of the Archean system are igneous, with
metamorphosed varieties of the same; sedimentary rocks, distinctly
recognizable as such, are scarce, though highly metamorphosed rocks
supposed to be sediments, in some regions, take an important place.

There are several features which are peculiarly characteristic of the
Archean rocks:--(1) the extraordinary complexity of the assemblage of
igneous materials; (2) the extreme metamorphism and deformation which
nearly all the rocks have suffered; and (3) the inextricable
intermixture of igneous rocks with those for which a sedimentary origin
is postulated. Wherever the Archean rocks have been closely examined two
great groups of rocks are distinguishable, an older, schistose group and
a younger, granitoid and gneissic group. For many years the latter was
supposed to be the older, hence the epithets "primitive" or
"fundamental" were applied to it. Now, however, it has been shown, both
in Europe and in North America, that in certain regions a schistose
series is penetrated by a gneissose series and when this occurs the
schists must be the older. But bearing in mind the difficulties of
interpretation, it is not at all unreasonable to assume that there may
yet be regions where the gneissose rocks are the oldest; for where no
schistose series is present there may be no criterion for estimating the
age of the granites and gneisses. The exceedingly great difficulties
which lie in the way of every attempt to unravel the history of an
Archean rock-complex cannot be too forcibly emphasized; for to be able
to demonstrate the order of events and succession of rocks we should at
least know whether we are dealing with sediments, flows of volcanic
material, or intrusions, yet in many instances this cannot be done. In
some areas the gradual passage of highly foliated and metamorphosed
schists may be traced into comparatively unaltered arkoses, greywackes,
conglomerates; or into volcanic lava-flows, pyro-clastic rocks or dikes;
or again through a gneissose rock into a granite or a gabbro; but the
districts wherein these relationships have been thoroughly worked out
are very few.

This much may be said, that where the Archean system has been most
carefully studied, there appears to be (1) a schistose series, of itself
by no means simple but containing the foliated equivalents of
sedimentary and igneous rocks; into this series a gneissose group (2)
has been intruded in the form of batholites, great sheets and sills with
accompanying intrusional prolongations into the schists; subsequently,
into the gneisses and schists, after they had been further deformed,
sheared and foliated, another set (3) of dikes or thin sheet-like
intrusions penetrated. All this, namely, the formation of sediments, the
outpouring of volcanic rocks, their repeated deformation by powerful
dynamic agencies and then their penetration by dikes and sheets had been
completed and erosion had been at work upon the hardened and exposed
rocks, before the earliest pre-Cambrian sediment was deposited.

There has been much premature speculation as to the nature and origin of
these very ancient rocks. The prevalence of regular foliation with
layers of different mineral composition, producing a close resemblance
to bedding, has led some to imagine that the gneisses and schists were
themselves the product of the primeval oceans, a supposition that is no
longer worthy of further discussion. Others have supposed that the
gneisses were largely produced by the resorption and fusion of older
sediments in the molten interior of the earth; there is no evidence that
this has taken place upon an extended scale, though there is reason to
believe that something of this kind has happened in places, and there is
in the hypothesis nothing radically untenable. In one way the
sedimentary schists have undoubtedly been incorporated within the
gneissose mass, namely, by the extremely thorough and intimate
penetration of the former by the latter along planes of foliation; and
when a complex mass such as this has been further sheared and
metamorphosed, a uniform gneiss appears to result from the intermixture.

A not uncommon cause of the apparently bedded arrangement of layers of
different mineralogical composition may be traced to the original
differentiation of the granitoid magma into different mineral-sheets.
When these mineralogically different layers were forced into other
rocks, sometimes before the complete consolidation of the former and
sometimes subsequent to it, in the generally metamorphosed condition of
the whole, it is easy to see a superficial resemblance to bedding.

The Archean rocks have frequently been spoken of as the original crust
of the earth; but even granting a cooling molten globe with a
first-formed stony surface, it is tolerably clear that such a crust has
nowhere yet been found, nor is it ever likely to be discovered. The very
earliest recognizable sediments are the result of the destruction of
still earlier exposures of rock; the oldest known volcanic rocks were
poured upon a surface we can no longer distinguish, and as for the great
granitoid masses, they could only have been formed under the pressure of
superincumbent masses of material. The earliest known sediments must
have been deep in the zones of shearing and rock flowage before the
first pre-Cambrian denudation. The time required for these changes is
difficult to conceive.

As regards the life of the Archean, or, as some call it, the
"Archeozoic" period, we know nothing. The presence of carbonaceous shale
and graphitic schists as well as of the altered sedimentary iron ores
has been taken as indicative of vegetable life. Similarly, the
occurrence of limestones suggests the existence of organic activity, but
direct evidence is wanting. Much interest naturally attaches to this
remote period, and when Sir William E. Logan in 1854 found the
foraminifera-like _Eozoon Canadense_, high hopes of further discoveries
were entertained, but the inorganic nature of this structure has since
been clearly proved.

_Distribution._--It is generally assumed that the Archean rocks underlie
all the younger formations over the whole globe, and presumably this is
the only system that does so. Naturally, the area of its outcrop is
limited, for, directly or indirectly, all the younger rock groups must
rest upon it.

It has been estimated that Archean rocks appear at the surface over
one-fifth of the land area (omitting coverings of superficial drifts).
This estimate is no more than the roughest approximation, and is liable
at any time to revision as our knowledge of little-known regions is
increased. It must ever be borne in mind that the presence of a
gneissose or schistose complex does not in itself imply the Archean age
of such a set of rocks. Local manifestations of a similar petrological
facies may and do appear which are of vastly inferior geological age;
and unless there is unequivocal evidence that such rocks lie beneath the
oldest fossil-bearing strata, there can be no absolute certainty as to
their antiquity. It is more than likely that certain occurrences of
gneiss and schist, at present regarded as Archean, may prove on fuller
examination to be metamorphosed representatives of younger periods.

  _Britain._--The most important exposure of Archean rocks in Britain is
  in the north-west of Scotland, where they form the mainland in
  Sutherland and Ross-shire, and appear also in the outer Hebrides.
  Their great development in the isle of Lewis has given rise to the
  term "Lewisian" (Hebridean), by which the gneisses of this region are
  now generally known. The Lewisian series comprises two great groups of
  rocks, (1) the so-called "fundamental complex," an assemblage of acid,
  basic and intermediate irruptive rocks, associated together in a
  complex of extraordinary intricacy, and (2) a series of dikes, which
  like the rocks they traverse, show every gradation from ultra-basic to
  ultra-acid types. But the above bald statement conveys no idea of the
  complexity of the series, for before the "fundamental complex" had
  been pierced by the later dike system it had been subjected to severe
  dynamo-metamorphism and many of the massive rocks had been folded,
  thrust and sheared, and a very general state of foliation had been
  produced. Nor was this all, for after the intrusion of the dikes,
  great movements brought about vertical dislocations, and thrust
  planes, which traversed the rocks at all angles, accompanied by still
  further internal shearing and superinduced foliation.

  In the valley of Loch Maree and thence south-westward into Glenelg, a
  series of mica-schists, quartz-schists, saccharoid limestones and
  graphitic schists has been regarded as a group of sedimentary origin
  through which the Lewisian rocks have been irrupted.

  In England several small masses of gneiss, notably at Primrose Hill on
  the Wrekin, Shropshire, in the Malvern hills, and on the island of
  Anglesey in North Wales, are supposed to correspond with the Lewisian
  of Scotland.

  _North America._--In this continent there is a great development of
  Archean rocks in Canada. On the eastern side it covers nearly the
  whole of the Labrador peninsula, and extends into Baffin Bay and
  possibly over much of Greenland; a broad tract unites the great lake
  region with Labrador, and from the same region, by way of the
  Mackenzie valley, a similar tract extends in a north-westerly
  direction to the Arctic Ocean. This northern (Canadian) area of
  Archean includes portions of the states of Minnesota, Michigan,
  Wisconsin and the Adirondack region of New York. On the western side
  of the continent a series of disconnected exposures of Archean rocks
  runs downwards in a narrow belt from Alaska to New Mexico; and on the
  eastern side a similar belt reaches from Newfoundland to Alabama.

  Much attention is now being given to the more scattered exposures of
  Archean rocks, but the best-known area is the classical ground in the
  vicinity of Lake Superior and Lake Huron and in the Ottawa gneiss
  region of Canada. Some of the more important districts are the
  following:--

  Rainy Lake district, Canada: The Archean rocks here consist of altered
  diorites and diabases (the lower Keewatin series) and black hornblende
  schists (probably altered igneous rocks), with mica gneisses which are
  perhaps of sedimentary origin.

  The Mona and Kiticni schists; metamorphosed lava and tuffs, with
  serpentine and dolomite, probably derived from peridotites; there are
  also gneissic granites and syenites.

  In the Menominee region of Michigan and Wisconsin, the Quinnesec
  schist series mainly consist of schistose quartz porphyry with
  associated gneisses.

  In the Mesaba district of Minnesota the Archean consists of a complex
  of more or less foliated igneous rocks mostly basic in character.

  The Archean of the Vermilion district of Minnesota comprises the
  Soudan formation, an altered sedimentary series with banded cherts,
  jasper and magnetite schists; the iron ores are extensively mined. At
  the base is a conglomerate containing pebbles from the formation
  below, the Ely greenstone, which is made up of altered basalts and
  andesites, generally in a schistose condition, but occasionally
  exhibiting spherulitic structures. Into these two formations a series
  of granites have been intruded.

  _Europe._--In Scandinavia, as in Scotland, the pre-Cambrian is
  represented by an earlier and a later series of rocks of which the
  former (Grundfjeldet, Urberget) may be taken to be the equivalent of
  the Lewisian gneisses. This assemblage of coarse red and grey banded
  gneisses, with associated granulites and many varieties of acid, basic
  and intermediate rocks in a gneissose condition, is intimately related
  to a highly metamorphosed sedimentary series comprising limestones,
  quartzites and schists, which, as in Scotland, is apparently older
  than the gneisses. Similar rocks occur in Sweden and Finland.

  In Bavaria and Bohemia the Archean is divisible into a lower red
  gneiss, a comparatively simple series, called by C.W. von Gümbel the
  "gneiss of Bojan"; and an upper, grey gneiss with other schistose
  rocks, serpentine and graphitic limestone, termed by the same author
  the "Hercynian gneiss."

  In Brittany a gneissose and schistose igneous series lies at the base
  of the pre-Cambrian. The pre-Cambrian cores of the eastern and central
  Pyrenees, consisting of gneiss, schists and altered limestones, are
  presumably of Archean age.

  _Asia, Australia, &c._--In northern China, mica-gneisses and
  granite-gneisses with associated schists may be regarded as Archean.
  In India the system is represented by the Bundelkhand gneiss and the
  central older gneisses of the Himalayas. In Japan, in the Abukuma
  plateau, there is much granite, gneiss and schist which may be of this
  age. In Australia, similar rocks are recognized as Archean in South
  Australia and Westralia, and they are estimated to cover an area of no
  less than 20,000 sq. m.; in Tasmania they are well developed on the
  western side. Although a great area is occupied by crystalline rocks
  in New Zealand, the Archean age of any portion of the series is not
  yet satisfactorily established; the lower granites and gneisses may
  belong to this period. Africa contains enormous tracts of crystalline
  gneisses, granites and schists, and some of these are almost certainly
  of Archean age; but in the present state of our knowledge it is
  impossible to speak more exactly.

  REFERENCES.--A good general account of the Archean system will be
  found in Sir A. Geikie's _Text Book of Geology_, vol. ii., 4th ed.
  (1903), and in T.C. Chamberlin and R.D. Salisbury's _Geology_, vol.
  ii. (1906); these volumes contain references to all important
  literature.     (J. A. H.)