ARCHDEACON (Lat. _archidiaconus_, Gr. [Greek: archidiakonos]), a high
official of the Christian Church. The office of archdeacon is of great
antiquity. So early as the 4th century it is mentioned as an established
office, and it is probable that it was in existence in the 3rd.
Originally the archdeacon was, as the name implies, the chief of the
deacons attached to the bishop's cathedral, his duty being, besides
preaching, to supervise the deacons and their work, i.e. more especially
the care of the sick and the arrangement of the externals of divine
worship. Even thus early their close relation to the bishop and their
employment in matters of episcopal administration gave them, though only
in deacons' orders, great importance, which continually developed. In
the East, in the 5th century, the archdeacons were already charged with
the proof of the qualifications of candidates for ordination; they
attended the bishops at ecclesiastical synods, and sometimes acted as
their representatives; they shared in the administration of sees during
a vacancy. In the West, in the 6th and 7th centuries, besides the
original functions of their office, archdeacons had certain well-defined
rights of visitation and supervision, being responsible for the good
order of the lower clergy, the upkeep of ecclesiastical buildings and
the safe-guarding of the church furniture--functions which involved a
considerable disciplinary power. During the 8th and 9th centuries the
office tended to become more and more exclusively purely administrative,
the archdeacon by his visitations relieving the bishop of the minutiae
of government and keeping him informed in detail of the condition of his
diocese. The archdeacon had thus become, on the one hand, the _oculus
episcopi_, but on the other hand, armed as he was with powers of
imposing penance and, in case of stubborn disobedience, of
excommunicating offenders, his power tended more and more to grow at the
bishop's expense. This process received a great impulse from the
erection in the 11th and 12th centuries of defined territorial
jurisdictions for the archdeacons, who had hitherto been itinerant
representatives of the central power of the diocese. The dioceses were
now mapped out into several archdeaconries (_archidiaconatus_), which
corresponded with the political divisions of the countries; and these
defined spheres, in accordance with the prevailing feudal tendencies of
the age, gradually came to be regarded as independent centres of
jurisdiction.[1] The bishops, now increasingly absorbed in secular
affairs, were content with a somewhat theoretical power of control,
while the archdeacons rigorously asserted an independent position which
implied great power and possibilities of wealth. The custom, moreover,
had grown up of bestowing the coveted office of archdeacon on the
provosts, deans and canons of the cathedral churches, and the
archdeacons were thus involved in the struggle of the chapters against
the episcopal authority. By the 12th century the archdeacon had become
practically independent of the bishop, whose consent was only required
in certain specified cases.

The power of the archdeacon reached its zenith at the outset of the 13th
century. Innocent III. describes him as _judex ordinarius_, and he
possesses in his own right the powers of visitation, of holding courts
and imposing penalties, of deciding in matrimonial causes and cases of
disputed jurisdiction, of testing candidates for orders, of inducting
into benefices. He has the right to certain procurations, and to appoint
and depose archpriests and rural deans. And these powers he may exercise
through delegated _officiales_. His jurisdiction has become, in fact,
not subordinate to, but co-ordinate with that of the bishop. Yet, so far
as orders were concerned, he remained a deacon; and if archdeacons were
often priests, this was because priests who were members of chapters
were appointed to the office.

From the 13th century onward a reaction set in. The power of the
archdeacons rested upon custom and prescription, not upon the canon law;
and though the bishops could not break, they could circumvent it. This
they did by appointing new officials to exercise in their name the
rights still reserved to them, or to which they laid claim. These were
the _officiales:_ the _officiales foranei_, whose jurisdiction was
parallel with that of the archdeacons, and the _officiales principales_
and vicars-general, who presided over the courts of appeal. The clergy
having thus another authority, and one moreover more canonical, to
appeal to, the power of the archdeacons gradually declined; and, so far
as the Roman Catholic Church is concerned, it received its death-blow
from the council of Trent (1564), which withdrew all matrimonial and
criminal causes from the competence of the archdeacons, forbade them to
pronounce excommunications, and allowed them only to hold visitations in
connexion with those of the bishop and with his consent. These decrees
were not, indeed, at once universally enforced; but the convulsions of
the Revolutionary epoch and the religious reorganization that followed
completed the work. In the Roman Church to-day the office of archdeacon
is merely titular, his sole function being to present the candidates for
ordination to the bishop. The title, indeed, hardly exists save in
Italy, where the archdeacon is no more than a dignified member of a
chapter, who takes rank after the bishop. The ancient functions of the
archdeacon are exercised by the vicar-general. In the Lutheran church
the title _Archidiakonus_ is given in some places to the senior
assistant pastor of a church.

In the Church of England, on the other hand, the office of archdeacon,
which was first introduced at the Norman conquest, survives, with many
of its ancient duties and prerogatives. Since 1836 there have been at
least two archdeaconries in each diocese, and in some dioceses there are
four archdeacons. The archdeacons are appointed by their respective
bishops, and they are, by an act of 1840, required to have been six full
years in priest's orders. The functions of the archdeacon are in the
present day ancillary in a general way to those of the bishop of the
diocese. It is his especial duty to inspect the churches within his
archdeaconry, to see that the fabrics are kept in repair, and to hold
annual visitations of the clergy and churchwardens of each parish, for
the purpose of ascertaining that the clergy are in residence, of
admitting the newly elected churchwardens into office, and of receiving
the presentments of the outgoing churchwardens. It is his privilege to
present all candidates for ordination to the bishop of the diocese. It
is his duty also to induct the clergy of his archdeaconry into the
temporalities of their benefices after they have been instituted into
the spiritualities by the bishop or his vicar-general. Every archdeacon
is entitled to appoint an official to preside over his archidiaconal
court, from which there is an appeal to the consistory court of the
bishop. The archdeacons are _ex officio_ members of the convocations of
their respective provinces.

It is the privilege of the archdeacon of Canterbury to induct the
archbishop and all the bishops of the province of Canterbury into their
respective bishoprics, and this he does in the case of a bishop under a
mandate from the archbishop of Canterbury, directing him to induct the
bishop into the real, actual, and corporal possession of the bishopric,
and to install and to enthrone him; and in the case of the archbishop,
under an analogous mandate from the dean and chapter of Canterbury, as
being guardians of the spiritualities during the vacancy of the
archiepiscopal see. In the colonies there are two or more archdeacons in
each diocese, and their functions correspond to those of English
archdeacons. In the Episcopal church of America the office of archdeacon
exists in only one or two dioceses.

  See Hinschius, _Kirchenrecht_, ii., §§ 86. 87; Schröder, _Die
  Entwicklung des Archdiakonats bis zum 11. Jahrhundert_ (Munich, 1890);
  Wetzer and Welte, _Kirchenlexikon_ (Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1882-1901);
  Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyklopadie_ (ed. 1896); Phillimore,
  _Ecclesiastical Law_, part ii. chap. v. (London, 1895).     (W. A. P.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] Archdeaconries were, indeed, sometimes treated as ordinary fiefs
    and were held as such by laymen. Thus Ordericus Vitalis says that
    "(Fulk) granted to the monks the archdeaconry which he and his
    predecessors held in fee of the archbishop of Rouen" (_Hist. Eccl._
    iii. 12).