ARCHILOCHUS, Greek lyric poet and writer of lampoons, was born at Paros,
one of the Cyclades islands. The date of his birth is uncertain, but he
probably flourished about 650 B.C.; according to some, about forty years
earlier but certainly not before the reign of Gyges (687-652), whom he
mentions in a well-known fragment. His father, Telesicles, who was of
noble family, had conducted a colony to Thasos, in obedience to the
command of the Delphic oracle. To this island Archilochus himself, hard
pressed by poverty, afterwards removed. Another reason for leaving his
native place was personal disappointment and indignation at the
treatment he had received from Lycambes, a citizen of Paros, who had
promised him his daughter Neobule in marriage, but had afterwards
withdrawn his consent. Archilochus, taking advantage of the licence
allowed at the feasts of Demeter, poured out his wounded feelings in
unmerciful satire. He accused Lycambes of perjury, and his daughters of
leading the most abandoned lives. Such was the effect produced by his
verses, that Lycambes and his daughters are said to have hanged
themselves. At Thasos the poet passed some unhappy years; his hopes of
wealth were disappointed; according to him, Thasos was the meeting-place
of the calamities of all Hellas. The inhabitants were frequently
involved in quarrels with their neighbours, and in a war against the
Saians--a Thracian tribe--he threw away his shield and fled from the
field of battle. He does not seem to have felt the disgrace very keenly,
for, like Alcaeus and Horace, he commemorates the event in a fragment in
which he congratulates himself on having saved his life, and says he can
easily procure another shield. After leaving Thasos, he is said to have
visited Sparta, but to have been at once banished from that city on
account of his cowardice and the licentious character of his works
(Valerius Maximus vi. 3, _externa_ 1). He next visited Siris, in lower
Italy, a city of which he speaks very favourably. He then returned to
his native place, and was slain in a battle against the Naxians by one
Calondas or Corax, who was cursed by the oracle for having slain a
servant of the Muses.

The writings of Archilochus consisted of elegies, hymns--one of which
used to be sung by the victors in the Olympic games (Pindar, _Olympia_,
ix. i)--and of poems in the iambic and trochaic measures. To him
certainly we owe the invention of iambic poetry and its application to
the purposes of satire. The only previous measures in Greek poetry had
been the epic hexameter, and its offshoot the elegiac metre; but the
slow measured structure of hexameter verse was utterly unsuited to
express the quick, light motions of satire. Archilochus made use of the
iambus and the trochee, and organized them into the two forms of metre
known as the iambic trimeter and the trochaic tetrameter. The trochaic
metre he generally used for subjects of a serious nature; the iambic for
satires. He was also the first to make use of the arrangement of verses
called the epode. Horace in his metres to a great extent follows
Archilochus (_Epistles_, i. 19. 23-35). All ancient authorities unite in
praising the poems of Archilochus, in terms which appear exaggerated
(Longinus xiii. 3; Dio Chrysostom, _Orationes_, xxxiii.; Quintilian x.
i. 60; Cicero, _Orator_, i.). His verses seem certainly to have
possessed strength, flexibility, nervous vigour, and, beyond everything
else, impetuous vehemence and energy. Horace (_Ars Poetica_, 79) speaks
of the "rage" of Archilochus, and Hadrian calls his verses "raging
iambics." By his countrymen he was reverenced as the equal of Homer, and
statues of these two poets were dedicated on the same day.

  His poems were written in the old Ionic dialect. Fragments in Bergk,
  _Poetae Lyrici Graeci_; Liebel, _Archilochi Reliquiae_ (1818); A.
  Hauvette-Besnault, _Archiloque, sa vie et ses poésies_ (1905).