ARCHERY,

  History in war.

the art and practice of shooting with the bow (_arcus_) and arrow, or
with crossbow and bolts. Though these weapons are by no means widely
used amongst savage tribes of the present day, their origin is lost in
the mists of antiquity. Amongst the great peoples of ancient history
the Egyptians were the first and the most famous of archers, relying on
the bow as their principal weapon in war. Their bows were somewhat
shorter than a man, and their arrows varied between 2 ft. and 2 ft. 8
in. in length. Here, as elsewhere, flint heads for arrows were by no
means rare, but bronze was the usual material employed. The Biblical bow
was of reed, wood or horn, and the Israelites used it freely both in war
(Gen. xlviii. 22) and in the chase (xxi. 20). The Assyrians also were a
nation of archers. Amongst the Greeks of the historic period archery was
not much in evidence, in spite of the tradition of Teucer, Ulysses and
many other archers of the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_. The Cretans, however,
supplied Greek armies with the bowmen required. In the "Ten Thousand"
figured two hundred Cretan bowmen of Sosias' corps. Rüstow and Köchly
(_Geschichte des griechischen Kriegwesens_, p. 131) estimate the range
of the Cretan bow at eighty to one hundred paces, as compared with the
sling-bullet's forty or fifty, and the javelin's thirty to forty. The
Romans as a nation were, equally with the Greeks, indifferent to
archery; in their legions the archer element was furnished by Cretans
and Asiatics. On the other hand nearly all Asiatic and derived nations
were famous bowmen, from the nations who fought under Xerxes' banner
onwards. The Persian, Scythian and Parthian bow was far more efficient
than the Cretan, though the latter was not wanting in the heterogeneous
armies of the East. The _sagittarii_, three thousand strong, who fought
in the Pharsalian campaign, were drawn from Crete, Pontus, Syria, &c.
But the Roman view of archery was radically altered when the old
legionary system perished at Adrianople (A.D. 378). After this time the
armies of the empire consisted in great part of horse-archers. Their
missiles, we are told, pierced cuirass and shield with ease, and they
shot equally well dismounted and at the gallop. These troops, combined
with heavy cavalry and themselves not unprovided with armour, played a
decisive part in the Roman victories of the age of Belisarius and
Narses. The destruction of the Franks at Casilinum (A.D. 554) was
practically the work of the horse-archers.

In the main, the nations whose migrations altered the face of Europe
were not archers. Only with the Welsh, the Scandinavians, and the
peoples in touch with the Eastern empire was the bow a favourite weapon.
The edicts of Charlemagne could not succeed in making archery popular in
his dominions, and Abbot Ebles, the defender of Paris in 886, is almost
the only instance of a skilled archer in the European records of the
time. The sagas, on the other hand, have much to say as to the feats of
northern heroes with the bow. With English, French and Germans the bow
was the weapon of the poorest military classes. The Norman archers, who
doubtless preserved the traditions of their Danish ancestors, were in
the forefront of William's line at Hastings (1066), but contemporary
evidence points conclusively to the short bow, drawn to the chest, as
the weapon used on this occasion. The combat of Bourgthéroulde in 1124
shows that the Normans still combined heavy cavalry and archers as at
Hastings. Horse-archers too (contrary to the usual belief) were here
employed by the English.

Yet the "Assize of Arms" of 1181 does not mention the bow, and Richard
I. was at great pains to procure crossbowmen for the Crusades. The
crossbow had from about the 10th century gradually become the principal
missile weapon in Europe, in spite of the fact that it was condemned by
the Lateran Council of 1139. As early as 1270 in France, and rather
later in Spain, the master of the crossbowmen had become a great
dignitary, and in Spain the weapon was used by a _corps d'élite_ of men
of gentle birth, who, with their gay apparel, were a picturesque feature
of continental armies of the period. But the Genoese, Pisans and
Venetians were the peoples which employed the crossbow most of all. Many
thousand Genoese crossbowmen were present at Creçy.

It was in the Crusades that the crossbow made its reputation, opposing
heavier weight and greater accuracy to the missiles of the
horse-archers, who invariably constituted the greatest and most
important part of the Asiatic armies. So little change in warfare had
centuries brought about that a crusading force in 1104 perished at
Carrhae, on the same ground and before the same mounted-archer tactics,
as the army of Crassus in 55 B.C. But individually the crusading
crossbowman was infinitely superior to the Turkish or Egyptian
horse-archer.

  English use.

England, which was to become the country of archers _par excellence_,
long retained the old short bow of Hastings, and the far more efficient
crossbow was only used as a rule by mercenaries, such as the celebrated
Falkes de Breauté and his men in the reign of John. South Wales, it
seems certain, eventually produced the famous long-bow. In Ireland, in
Henry II.'s time, Strongbow made great use of Welsh bowmen, whom he
mounted for purposes of guerrilla warfare, and eventually the prowess of
Welsh archers taught Edward I. the value of the hitherto discredited
arm. At Falkirk (q.v.), once for all, the long-bow proved its worth, and
thenceforward for centuries it was the principal weapon of English
soldiers. By 1339, archers had come to be half of the whole mass of
footmen, and later the proportion was greatly increased. In 1360 Edward
III. mounted his archers, as Strongbow had done. The long-bow was about
5 ft., and its shaft a cloth-yard long. Shot by a Welsh archer, a shaft
had penetrated an oak door (at Abergavenny in 1182) 4 in. thick and the
head stood out a hand's breadth on the inner side. Drawn to the right
ear, the bow was naturally capable of long shooting, and in Henry
VIII.'s time practice at a less range than one furlong was forbidden. In
rapidity it was the equal of the short bow and the superior of the
crossbow, which weapon, indeed, it surpassed in all respects. Falkirk,
and still more Creçy, Poitiers and Agincourt, made the English archers
the most celebrated infantry in Europe, and the kings of England, in
whatever else they differed from each other, were, from Edward II. to
Henry VIII., at one in the matter of archery. In 1363 Edward III.
commanded the general practice of archery on Sundays and holidays, all
other sports being forbidden. The provisions of this act were from time
to time re-issued, particularly in the well-known act of Henry VIII. The
price of bows and arrows was also regulated in the reign of Edward III.,
and Richard III. ordained that for every ton of certain goods imported
ten yew-bows should be imported also, while at the same time long-bows
of unusual size were admitted free of duty. In order to prevent the too
rapid consumption of yew for bow-staves, bowyers were ordered to make
four bows of wych-hazel, ash or elm to one of yew, and only the best and
most useful men were allowed to possess yew-bows. Distant and exposed
counties were provided for by making bowyers, fletchers, &c., liable
(unless freemen of the city of London) to be ordered to any point where
their services might be required. In Scotland and Ireland also,
considerable attention was paid to archery. In 1478 archery was
encouraged in Ireland by statute, and James I. and James IV. of
Scotland, in particular, did their best to stimulate the interest of
their subjects in the bow, whose powers they had felt in so many battles
from Falkirk to Homildon Hill.

  Decline as weapon.

The introduction of hand-firearms was naturally fatal to the bow as a
warlike weapon, but the conservatism of the English, and the
non-professional character of wars waged by them, added to the technical
deficiencies of early firearms, made the process of change in England
very gradual. The mercenary or professional element was naturally the
first to adopt the new weapons. At Pont de l'Arche in 1418 the English
had "_petits canons_" (which seem to have been hand guns), and during
the latter part of the Hundred Years' War their use became more and more
frequent. The crossbow soon disappeared from the more professional
armies of the continent. Charles the Bold had, before the battle of
Morat (1476), ten thousand _coulevrines à main_. But in the hands of
local forces the crossbow lingered on, at least in rural France, until
about 1630. Its last appearance in war was in the hands of the Chinese
at Taku (1860). But the long-bow, an incomparably finer weapon, endured
as one of the principal arms of the English soldier until about 1590.
Edward IV. entered London after the battle of Barnet with 500 "smokie
gunners" (foreign mercenaries), but at that engagement Warwick's centre
consisted solely of bows and bills (1471). The new weapons gradually
made their way, but even in 1588, the year of the Armada, the local
forces of Devonshire comprised 800 bows to 1600 "shot," and 800 bills to
800 pikes. But the Armada year saw the last appearance of the English
archer, and the same county in 1598 provides neither archers nor
billmen, while in the professional army in Ireland these weapons had
long given way to musket and caliver, pike and halberd. Archers appeared
in civilized warfare as late as 1807, when fifteen hundred "baskiers,"
horse-archers, clad in chain armour, fought against Napoleon in Poland.

As a weapon of the chase the bow was in its various forms employed even
more than in war. The rise of archery as a sport in England was, of
course, a consequence of its military value, which caused it to be so
heartily encouraged by all English sovereigns.

  Japan.

The Japanese were from their earliest times great archers, and the bow
was the weapon _par excellence_ of their soldiers. The standard length
of the bow (usually bamboo) was 7 ft. 6 in., of the arrow 3 ft. to 3 ft.
9 in. Numerous feats of archery are recorded to have taken place in the
"thirty-three span" halls of Kioto and Tokyo, where the archer had to
shoot the whole length of a very low corridor, 128 yds. long. Wada
Daihachi in the 17th century shot 8133 arrows down the corridor in
twenty-four consecutive hours, averaging five shots a minute, and in
1852 a modern archer made 5583 successful shots in twenty hours, or over
four a minute.

  History of Sport.

_The Pastime of Archery._--The use of the bow and arrow as a pastime
naturally accompanied their use as weapons of war, but when the gun
began to supersede the bow the pastime lost its popularity. Charles II.,
however, and his queen, Catherine of Braganza, interested themselves in
English archery, the queen in 1676 presenting a silver badge or shield
to the "Marshall of the Fraternity of Archers," which badge, once the
property of the Finsbury Archers, was transferred to the keeping of the
Royal Toxophilite Society, when in 1841 the two clubs combined. The
Toxophilite Society was founded in 1781; for though in the north archery
had long been practised, its resuscitation in the south really dates
from the formation of this club by Sir Ashton Lever. This society
received the title of "Royal" in 1847, though it had long been
patronized by royalty. It is an error to suppose that the Finsbury
Archers were connected with the Archers' division of the Hon. Artillery
Company, but many members of the Toxophilite Society joined that
division, and used its ground for shooting, securing, however, a London
ground of their own in the district where Gower Street, W.C., now is.
When this ground became unavailable, the shooting probably took place at
Highbury, and later in 1820, on Lord's cricket ground, the present
ground in the Inner Circle of Regent's Park, near the Botanical Gardens,
not being acquired till 1833. The society may be regarded as the most
important body connected with archery, most of the leading archers
belonging to it, though the Grand National Archery Society controls the
public meetings. Among its more important events is the shooting of 144
arrows at 100 yds. for the Crunder Cup and Bugle. In the early days of
the club targets of different sizes were used at the different ranges,
and the scores were recorded in money (e.g. "Mr Elwin, 86 hits,
£5:5:6"). The Woodmen of Arden can claim an almost equal antiquity,
having been founded--some say "revived"--in 1785. The number of members
is limited to 80; at one time there were 81, Sir Robert Peel having been
elected as a supernumerary by way of compliment. The headquarters of the
Woodmen are at Meriden in Warwickshire; the club has a nominal authority
over vert and venison, whence its officers bear appropriate
names-warden, master-forester and verderers; and the annual meeting is
called the Wardmote. The master-forester, or captain for the year, is
the maker of the first "gold" at the annual target; he who makes the
second is the senior verderer. The club devotes itself to the
old-fashioned clout-shooting at long ranges, reckoned by "scores," nine
score meaning 180 yds., and so on. (_Vide_ "Clout-shooting" _infra_.)
The chief matches in which the Woodmen engage are those against the
Royal Company of Scottish Archers. The Royal British Bowmen date back to
the end of the 18th century. Like many others, during the Napoleonic war
they suspended operations, revived when peace was made. The club was
finally dissolved in 1880. The Royal Kentish Bowmen were founded in
1785, but did not survive the war. John O'Gaunt's Bowmen, who still meet
at Lancaster, were revived, not created, at the same time, and still
flourish. The Herefordshire Bowmen only shoot at 60 yds., while the West
Berks Society is limited to twelve members, who meet at each other's
houses, except for their Autumn Handicap, shot on the Toxophilite
Grounds--216 arrows at 100 yds. The Royal Company of Archers is the
chief Scottish society. Originally a semi-military body constituted in
1676, it practised archery as a pastime from the time of its foundation,
several meetings being held in the first few years of its existence. It
devoted itself to "rovers," or long-range shooting at the "clout," among
its most interesting trophies being the "Musselburgh Arrow," first shot
for in 1603, possibly even earlier, in that town; the competition was
then open to all comers, for archery was long popular in Scotland,
especially at Kilwinning, the headquarters of popinjay (q.v.) shooting.
Other prizes are the "Peebles Silver Arrow," dating back to 1626, the
"Edinburgh Silver Arrow" (1709), the "Selkirk Arrow," a very ancient
prize, the "Dalhousie Sword," the "Hopetoun Royal Commemoration Prize,"
and others, shot for at ranges of 180 or 200 yds. The most curious is
the "Goose Medal." Originally a goose was buried in a butt with only its
head visible, and this was the archers' mark; now a small glass globe is
substituted. The "Popingo (Popinjay) Medal," for which a stuffed parrot
was once used as the mark, is now contested at the ordinary butts. The
Kilwinning Society of Archers, founded in 1688, did not disband till
1870; the Irvine Toxophilites flourished from 1814 till about 1867. But
of all societies the Grand National Archery Society, regulating the
great meetings, though comparatively young, is the most important.
Various open meetings were already in existence, but in 1844 a few
leading archers projected a Grand National Meeting, which was held in
York in that year and in 1845 and 1846, and subsequently in other
places. But the society did not exist as such till 1861, after the
meeting held at Liverpool, since when, notwithstanding some financial
troubles, it has been the legislative and managing body of English
archery. The chief meetings are the "Championship," the "Leamington and
Midland Counties," the "Crystal Palace," the "Grand Western" and the
"Grand Northern." For some years a "Scottish Grand National" was held,
but fell into abeyance. The "Scorton Arrow" is no longer shot for in the
Yorkshire village of that name, but the meeting, held regularly in the
county, dates back to 1673 by record, and is probably far older. The
silver arrow and the captaincy are awarded to the man who makes the
first gold; the silver bugle and lieutenancy to the first red; the gold
medal to most hits, and a horn spoon to the last white.

In the United States archery has had a limited popularity. The only one
of the early clubs that lasted long was the "United Bowmen of
Philadelphia," founded in 1828, but defunct in 1859. There was a revival
twenty years later, when a National Association was formed; and various
meetings were held annually and championships instituted, but there was
never any popular enthusiasm for the sport, though it showed signs of
increasing favour towards the end of the 19th century. The longer ranges
are not greatly favoured by American archers, though at some meetings
the regulation "York Round" (_vide infra_ under "Targets") and the
"National" are shot. Other rounds are the "Potomac," 24 arrows at 80, 24
at 70, and 24 at 60 yds.; the "Double American," 60 arrows each at 60,
50 and 40 yds.; and the "Double Columbia," for ladies, 48 each at 50, 40
and 30 yds. In team matches ladies shoot 96 arrows at 50 yds., gentlemen
96 at 60.

  _The Bow._--As used in the pastime of archery the length of the bows
  does not vary much, though it bears some relation to the length of
  the arrow and the length of the arrow to the strength of the archer,
  to which the weight of the bow has to be adapted. The proper weight of
  a bow is the number of lb. which, attached to the string, will draw a
  full-length arrow to its head. For men's bows the drawing-power varies
  from 40 to 60 lb., anything above this being extreme; ladies' bows
  draw from 24 to 32 lb. Estimating 50 lb. as a fair average, such a bow
  would be 6 ft. 1 in. long for a 30-in., 6 ft. for a 28-in., and 5 ft.
  11 in. for a 27-in. arrow, but the height as well as the strength of
  the archer have to be considered. Similarly a lady's bow on the
  average measures about 5 ft. 6 in. and her arrows 25 in. Modern bows
  are either made entirely of yew (occasionally of other woods), when
  they are called "self-bows," or of a combination of woods, when they
  are called "backed-bows." Self-bows are rarely or never made in a
  single stave, owing to the difficulty of obtaining true and flawless
  wood of the necessary length; hence two staves joined by a double
  fish-joint, which forms the centre of the bow, are used, tested and
  adjusted so that they may be as equally elastic as possible. The best
  yew is imported from Italy and Spain, and is allowed to season for
  three years before it is made into a bow, which again is not used till
  it is two years older. In backed-bows the belly, the rounded part
  nearest to the string, is generally but not necessarily made of yew,
  the back, or flat part, of yew (the best), hickory, lance or other
  woods, glued together in strips. The centre of the bow, for about 18
  in., should be stiff and resisting, then tapering off gradually to the
  horns in which the string is fitted, the greatest care being taken
  that the two limbs are uniform. The bow of self-yew is generally
  considered more agreeable to handle and has a better "cast," throwing
  the arrow more smoothly and with less jar, and since no glued parts
  are exposed, it is less liable to injury from wet. On the other hand,
  "crysals" (tiny cracks, which are apt to extend) are more frequent in
  this class of bow. Self-yew bows cost £8 or £10, where a good
  backed-bow can be bought for about half that. The self-bow is more
  sensitive than other bows, and its work is mostly done during the last
  few inches of the pull, where the backed-bow pulls evenly throughout.
  The backed-bow should be perfectly straight in the back, but after use
  often loses its shape either by "following the string," i.e. getting
  bent inwards on the string-side, or by becoming "reflex" (bending the
  opposite way). Self-bows are even more apt to lose their shape than
  backed-bows, as there is no hard wood to counteract the natural grain.
  A bow that is strongly reflexed at the ends is known as a "Cupid's
  bow." To form the handle the wood of the bow is left thick in the
  centre, and braid, leather or indiarubber is wound round it to give a
  better grip.

  _The String and Stringing._--The string is made of three strands of
  hemp, dressed with a preparation of glue, and should be perfectly
  round, smooth and not frayed, as a broken string may result in a
  broken bow. The string, at its centre, is 6 in. from the belly of the
  man's bow; 5 in. in the lady's bow. The clenched fist with the thumb
  upright was the old, rough and ready estimate, known as "fist-mele."
  For a few inches above and below the nocking point the string is
  lapped with carpet-thread to save it from fraying by contact with the
  arm; the nocking point being made by another lapping of filoselle
  silk, so that the string may exactly fit the nock of the arrow. When a
  bow is properly strung the string should be longitudinally along the
  middle of the belly.

  _Arrows and Nocking._--The parts of the arrow are the shaft, the
  "nock" or notch, the "pile" or point, and the feathers. The shaft is
  made of seasoned red deal, and may be "self" or "footed." Most arrows
  are "footed," i.e. a piece of hard wood to which the pile is attached
  is spliced to the deal shaft, which should be perfectly straight and
  stiff. The shaft is made in several shapes. Most archers prefer the
  "parallel" pattern--the shaft being the same size from nock to pile;
  the next is the "barrelled," the shape being thick in the centre and
  tapering towards the ends. The "bob-tail" diminishes from the pile to
  the nock; the "chested" tapers from the middle to the pile. The pile
  should not be taper but cylindrical, "broadshouldered" where the point
  begins. The nock is cut square. There are three feathers, the body
  feathers of a turkey or peacock being the best. They should all curve
  the same way, are about 1½ in. long and ½ in. deep, with the ends near
  the nock either square, or balloon-shaped. The weight of an arrow is
  its weight in new English silver; a five-shilling arrow is heavy for a
  man's bow, while four-shillings is light. A 28-in. arrow for a 50-lb.
  bow may weigh four-and-ninepence; a 27-in. arrow four-and-sixpence.
  This may serve as a rough standard.

  _Other Implements._--The archer uses finger-tips, or a "tab" of
  leather, to protect the fingers against the string, and a leather
  "bracer" to protect the left arm from its blow. Quivers are not now
  used except by ladies. A special box for carrying bows and arrows
  about; a proper cupboard, known as an "ascham," in which they may be
  kept at home in a dry, even temperature, not too hot; and a baize or
  leather case for use on the ground, are important minor articles of
  equipment.

  _Targets, Scoring and Handicapping._--The targets, 4 ft. in diameter,
  are made of straw 3 to 4 in. thick, and are supported sloping slightly
  backwards by an iron stand. The faces are of floor-cloth painted with
  concentric rings, 4-4/5 in. each in breadth. The outer ring, white,
  counts one point; the next, black, three; the next, blue, five; the
  next, red, seven; and the next, gold--a complete circle of 4-4/5 in.
  radius--nine. The exact centre of the gold is called the "pin-hole."
  The targets are set up in pairs, facing each other, the distances for
  men being 100, 80 and 60 yds.; for ladies, 60 and 50; for convenience,
  5 yds. are added to allow for a shooting-line that distance in front
  of each target. The centre of the gold should be 4 ft. from the
  ground. Each archer shoots three arrows--an "end"--at one target; they
  then cross over and mark the scores. If an arrow cuts two rings, the
  archer is credited with the value of the higher one. In matches a
  "York Round" or a "St George's Round" is usually shot by men, the
  former consisting of 144 arrows, 72 at 100 yds., 48 at 80 yds., and 24
  at 60 yds., the latter of 36 arrows at each of these distances. One
  York Round only is shot on a day; a double York Round is shot, one on
  each day, at the more important meetings. Ladies usually shoot the
  "National Round" of 48 arrows at 60 yds. and 24 at 50 yds. At most
  meetings the prizes are awarded on the gross scores; at others,
  including the Championship meeting, on points, two points for the
  highest score on the round and two for most hits on the round, one
  point each for highest score and most hits at each of the three
  ranges, ten points in all. Ladies' scores are calculated similarly. To
  decide the Championship, the Grand National Archery Society passed a
  rule in 1894 that "The Champion prizes shall be awarded to the archer
  gaining the greatest number of points, provided that those for gross
  hits or gross score are included; any points won by other archers
  shall be redistributed among those gaining the points for gross hits
  or gross score." Handicapping may be done by "rings," the winner of a
  first prize not being allowed to count "whites" at subsequent
  meetings, and "blacks" and "blues" being lost for further successes.
  Better methods are (1) to deduct a percentage from the gross score of
  successful shooters, (2) to handicap by points, as in other pastimes,
  or (3) to rate a shooter according to the average of his last year's
  performances, re-rating him monthly, or at convenient intervals, the
  system being to add his average of the current year to his average of
  last year, and divide the sum by two to form his new rating.

  _Clout and Long Distance Shooting._--This form of archery is chiefly
  supported by the Woodmen of Arden and the Royal Company. At 100 yds.,
  the target (smaller by 4 in. than the usual one, but with an inner
  white circle instead of the blue) is set up against a butt only 18 in.
  from the ground, but for nine-score, ten-score, and twelve-score
  shooting it is a white target, 2 ft. 6 in. in diameter, with a black
  centre. The target, the centre and the arrow that hits the centre are
  each known as a "clout." Hits and misses are signalled by a marker
  stationed, rather perilously, by the side of the butt. The target is
  sloped backwards to an angle of 60°, with rings marked round it on the
  ground at distances of 1½ ft., 3 ft., 6 ft. and 9 ft., a hit in the
  outer ring counting one, and in the next two, and so on, the clout or
  centre counting six. For the longer ranges lighter arrows are used.
  The Scottish clout was a piece of canvas, stretched on a frame; the
  range 180 or 200 yds.; all arrows counted one that were within 24 ft.
  of the target, the clout counting two. Modern archers have paid scant
  attention to mere distance-shooting, which is an art of its own, but
  their experiments prove that with a fairly heavy bow, say 60 lb. or 63
  lb., and a long light arrow, known as a "flight arrow," a good archer
  should be able to reach 300 or 310 yds. With a heavier bow, properly
  under control, 50 or 60 yds. might be added to this by a strong man.
  These experiments seem to be verified by a quotation from Shakespeare
  (Henry IV. Act iii. Sc. 2): "A' would have clapped i' the clout and
  twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen
  and a half," i.e. 280 or 290 yds. Instances are recorded of Englishmen
  shooting 340 and 360 yds., but in 1795 Mahmoud Effendi of the Turkish
  embassy shot 482 yds. with a Turkish bow, and Sultan Selim 972. The
  Turk, however, used a Turkish bow and a 14-in. arrow, with a grooved
  rest on his left arm along which the arrow passed, to compensate for
  the difference between the draw of the bow and the shortness of the
  arrow. The diplomatist's shot is supported by good evidence, but the
  sultan's is regarded as improbable at least.

  _Championship and Scores._--The British championship meetings,
  instituted in 1844, are conducted under the laws of the Grand National
  Archery Society: the prizes, apart from the Challenge prizes, are
  given in money, there being also a rule that any one who makes three
  golds at one end receives a shilling from all others of the same sex
  who are shooting. The most notable champion was Horace A. Ford (d.
  1880), who held the title for eleven consecutive years, 1849 to 1859
  inclusive, and again in 1867. He made a four-figure score at four
  other championship meetings, his highest, 1251 (in 1857) for 245 hits
  being unapproached. To him the modern scientific practice of archery
  must largely be attributed, together with its improvement and its
  popularity. The names of G. Edwards, Major C. Hawkins Fisher, H.H.
  Palairet, C.E. Nesham, and G.E.S. Fryer, are also notable as
  champions. Among ladies Mrs Horniblow was champion for eleven years
  between 1852 and 1881, Miss Legh for nineteen years between 1880 and
  1908; Mrs Piers Legh, Miss Betham and Mrs Bowly claim the title on
  four occasions. Mrs Bowly's score of 823 (1894) was the highest made
  for the championship till Miss Legh made 825 with 143 hits--only one
  arrow missed altogether--in 1898; beating her own record with a score
  of 841 (143 hits) in 1904. It should not be forgotten that as the
  championship is awarded by points, the highest score does not
  necessarily win.

  See Roger Ascham, _Toxophilus_ (1545), edited by Edward Arber (London,
  1868); _The Arte of Warre_, by William Garrard (London 1591); _The
  Arte of Archerie_, by Gervase Markham (London, 1634); _Ancient and
  Modern Methods of Arrow Release_, by E.S. Morse (1885); _The English
  Bowman_, by T. Roberts (London, 1801); _A Treatise on Archery_, by
  Thomas Waring (London, 9th ed., 1832); _The Theory and Practice of
  Archery_, by Horace A. Ford (new ed., London, 1887); _Archery_, by
  C.J. Longman and H. Walrond (Badminton Library, London, 1894).
       (W. J. F.)