ARCHBISHOP (Lat. _archiepiscopus_, from Gr. [Greek: harchiepiskopos]),
in the Christian Church, the title of a bishop of superior rank,
implying usually jurisdiction over other bishops, but no superiority of
order over them. The functions of the archbishop, as at present
exercised, developed out of those of the metropolitan (q.v.); though the
title of archbishop, when it first appeared, implied no metropolitan
jurisdiction. Nor are the terms interchangeable now; for not all
metropolitans are archbishops,[1] nor all archbishops metropolitans. The
title seems to have been introduced first in the East, in the 4th
century, as an honorary distinction implying no superiority of
jurisdiction. Its first recorded use is by Athanasius, bishop of
Alexandria, who applied it to his predecessor Alexander as a mark of
respect. In the same way Gregory of Nazianzus bestowed it upon
Athanasius himself. In the next century its use would seem to have been
more common as the title of bishops of important sees; for several
archbishops are stated to have been present at the council of Chalcedon
in 451. In the Western Church the title was hardly known before the 7th
century, and did not become common until the Carolingian emperors
revived the right of the metropolitans to summon provincial synods. The
metropolitans now commonly assumed the title of archbishop to mark their
pre-eminence over the other bishops; at the same time the obligation
imposed upon them, mainly at the instance of St Boniface, to receive the
_pallium_ (q.v.) from Rome, definitely marked the defeat of their claim
to exercise metropolitan jurisdiction independently of the pope.

At the present day, the title of archbishop is retained in the Roman
Catholic Church, the various oriental churches, the Anglican Church, and
certain branches of the Lutheran (Evangelical) Church.

  Roman Catholic Church.

In the Roman Catholic Church the powers of the archbishop are
considerably less extensive than they were in the middle ages. According
to the medieval canon law, based on the decretals, and codified in the
13th century in the _Corpus juris canonici_, by which the earlier powers
of metropolitans had been greatly curtailed, the powers of the
archbishop consisted in the right (1) to confirm and consecrate
suffragan bishops; (2) to summon and preside over provincial synods; (3)
to superintend the suffragans and visit their dioceses, as well as to
censure and punish bishops in the interests of discipline, the right of
deprivation, however, being reserved to the pope; (4) to act as a court
of appeal from the diocesan courts; (5) to exercise the _jus
devolutionis_, i.e. present to benefices in the gift of bishops, if
these neglect their duty in this respect. These rights were greatly
curtailed by the council of Trent. The confirmation and consecration of
bishops (q.v.) is now reserved to the Holy See. The summoning of
provincial synods, which was made obligatory every three years by the
council, was long neglected, but is now more common wherever the
political conditions, e.g. in the United States, Great Britain and
France, are favourable. The disciplinary powers of the archbishop, on
the other hand, can scarcely be said to survive. The right to hold a
visitation of a suffragan's diocese or to issue censures against him
was, by Sess. xxiv. c. 3 _de ref._, of the council of Trent, made
dependent upon the consent of the provincial synod after cause shown
(_causa cognita et probata_); and the only two powers left to the
archbishop in this respect are to watch over the diocesan seminaries and
to compel the residence of the bishop in his diocese. The right of the
archbishop to exercise a certain disciplinary power over the regular
orders is possessed by him, not as archbishop, but as the delegate _ad
hoc_ of the pope. Finally, the function of the archbishop as judge in a
court of appeal, though it still subsists, is of little practical
importance now that the clergy, in civil matters, are universally
subject to the secular courts.

Besides archbishops who are metropolitans there are in the Roman
Catholic Church others who have no metropolitan jurisdiction. Such are
the titular archbishops _in partibus_, and certain archbishops of
Italian sees who have no bishops under them. Archbishops rank
immediately after patriarchs and have the same precedence as primates.
The right to wear the _pallium_ is confined to those archbishops who are
not merely titular. It must be applied for, either in person or by
proxy, at Rome by the archbishop within three months of his consecration
or enthronement, and, before receiving it, he must take the oaths of
fidelity and obedience to the Holy See. Until the _pallium_ is granted,
the archbishop is known only as archbishop-elect, and is not empowered
to exercise his _potestas ordinis_ in the archdiocese nor to summon the
provincial synod and exercise the jurisdiction dependent upon this. He
may, however, exercise his purely _episcopal_ functions. The special
ensign of his office is the cross, _crux erecta_ or _gestatoria_,
carried before him on solemn occasions (see CROSS).

  Eastern Church.

In the Orthodox and other churches of the East the title of archbishop
is of far more common occurrence than in the West, and is less
consistently associated with metropolitan functions. Thus in Greece
there are eleven archbishops to thirteen bishops, the archbishop of
Athens alone being metropolitan; in Cyprus, where there are four bishops
and only one archbishop, all five are of metropolitan rank.

  Lutheran church.

In the Protestant churches of continental Europe the title of archbishop
has fallen into almost complete disuse. It is, however, still borne by
the Lutheran bishop of Upsala, who is metropolitan of Sweden, and by the
Lutheran bishop of Åbo in Finland. In Prussia the title has occasionally
been bestowed by the king on general superintendents of the Lutheran
church, as in 1829, when Frederick William III. gave it to his friend
and spiritual adviser, the celebrated preacher, Ludwig Ernst Borowski
(1740-1831), general superintendent of Prussia (1812) and bishop (1816).

  Church of England.

In the Church of England and its sister and daughter churches the
position of the archbishop is defined by the medieval canon law as
confirmed or modified by statute since the Reformation. It is,
therefore, as regards both the _potestas ordinis_ and jurisdiction,
substantially the same as in the Roman Catholic Church, save as modified
on the one hand by the substitution of the supremacy of the crown for
that of the Holy See, and on the other by the restrictions imposed by
the council of Trent.

The ecclesiastical government of the Church of England is divided
between two archbishops--the archbishop of Canterbury, who is "primate
of all England" and metropolitan of the province of Canterbury, and the
archbishop of York, who is "primate of England" and metropolitan of the
province of York. The jurisdiction of the archbishop of Canterbury as
primate of all England extends in certain matters into the province of
York. He exercised the jurisdiction of _legatus natus_ of the pope
throughout all England before the Reformation, and since that event he
has been empowered, by 25 Hen. VIII. c. 21, to exercise certain powers
of dispensation in cases formerly sued for in the court of Rome. Under
this statute the archbishop continues to grant special licences to
marry, which are valid in both provinces; he appoints notaries public,
who may practise in both provinces; and he grants dispensations to
clerks to hold more than one benefice, subject to certain restrictions
which have been imposed by later statutes. The archbishop also continues
to grant degrees in the faculties of theology, music and law, which are
known as Lambeth degrees. His power to grant degrees in medicine,
qualifying the recipients to practise, was practically restrained by the
Medical Act 1858.

The archbishop of Canterbury exercises the twofold jurisdiction of a
metropolitan and a diocesan bishop. As metropolitan he is the guardian
of the spiritualities of every vacant see within the province, he
presents to all benefices which fall vacant during the vacancy of the
see, and through his special commissary exercises the ordinary
jurisdiction of a bishop within the vacant diocese. He exercises also an
appellate jurisdiction over each bishop, which, in cases of licensed
curates, he exercises personally under the Pluralities Act 1838; but his
ordinary appellate jurisdiction is exercised by the judge of the Arches
court (see ARCHES, COURT OF). The archbishop had formerly exclusive
jurisdiction in all causes of wills and intestacies, where parties died
having personal property in more than one diocese of the province of
Canterbury, and he had concurrent jurisdiction in other cases. This
jurisdiction, which he exercised through the judge of the Prerogative
court, was transferred to the crown by the Court of Probate Act 1857.
The Arches court was also the court of appeal from the consistory courts
of the bishops of the province in all testamentary and matrimonial
causes. The matrimonial jurisdiction was transferred to the crown by the
Matrimonial Causes Act 1857. The court of Audience, in which the
archbishop presided personally, attended by his vicar-general, and
sometimes by episcopal assessors, has fallen into desuetude. The
vicar-general, however, exercises jurisdiction in matters of ordinary
marriage licences and of institutions to benefices. The master of the
faculties regulates the appointment of notaries public, and all
dispensations which fall under 25 Hen. VIII. c. 21.

A right very rarely exercised by the archbishop of Canterbury, but one
of great importance, is that of the visitation and deprivation of
inferior bishops. Since there is no example of the archbishop of York
exercising or being reputed to have such disciplinary jurisdiction over
his suffragans,[2] and this right could, according to the canon law
cited above, in the middle ages only be exercised normally in concert
with the provincial synod, it would seem to be a survival of the special
jurisdiction enjoyed by the pre-Reformation archbishop as _legatus
natus_ of the pope. It was somewhat freely exercised by Cranmer and his
successors immediately after the Reformation; but the main precedent now
relied upon is that of Dr Watson, bishop of St Davids, who was deprived
in 1695 by Archbishop Tennison for simony and other offences, the
legality of the sentence being finally confirmed by the House of Lords
on the 25th of January 1705. It was proved in the course of the long
argument in this case that the archbishop of Canterbury had undoubtedly
exercised such independent power of visitation both before and after the
Reformation; and it was on this precedent that in 1888 the judicial
committee of the privy council mainly relied in deciding that the
archbishop had the right to cite before him the bishop of Lincoln (Dr
Edward King), who was accused of certain irregular ritual practices. The
trial began on the 12th of February 1889 before the archbishop and
certain assessors, the protest of Dr King, based on the claim that he
could only be tried in a provincial synod, being overruled by Archbishop
Benson on the grounds above stated. The main importance of the "Lincoln
Judgment," delivered on the 21st of November 1890, is that it set a new
precedent for the effective jurisdiction of the archbishop, based on the
ancient canon law, and so did something towards the establishment of a
purely "spiritual" court, the absence of which had been one of the main
grievances of a large body of the clergy.

It is the privilege of the archbishop of Canterbury to crown the kings
and queens of England. He is entitled to consecrate all the bishops
within his province and was formerly entitled, upon consecrating a
bishop, to select a benefice within his diocese at his option for one of
his chaplains, but this practice was indirectly abolished by 3 and 4
Vict. c. III, § 42. He is entitled to nominate eight chaplains, who had
formerly certain statutory privileges, which are now abolished. He is
_ex officio_ an ecclesiastical commissioner for England, and has by
statute the right of nominating one of the salaried ecclesiastical
commissioners.

The archbishop exercises the ordinary jurisdiction of a bishop over his
diocese through his consistory court at Canterbury, the judge of which
court is styled the commissary-general of the city and diocese of
Canterbury. The archbishop holds a visitation of his diocese personally
every three years, and he is the only diocesan who has kept up the
triennial visitation of the dean and chapter of his cathedral.[3] The
archbishop of Canterbury takes precedence immediately after princes of
the blood royal and over every peer of parliament, including the lord
chancellor.

The archbishop of York has immediate spiritual jurisdiction as
metropolitan in the case of all vacant sees within the province of York,
analogous to that which is exercised by the archbishop of Canterbury
within the province of Canterbury. He has also an appellate jurisdiction
of an analogous character, which he exercises through his provincial
court, whilst his diocesan jurisdiction is exercised through his
consistorial court, the judges of both courts being nominated by the
archbishop. His ancient testamentary and matrimonial jurisdiction was
transferred to the crown by the same statutes which divested the see of
Canterbury of its jurisdiction in similar matters. It is the privilege
of the archbishop of York to crown the queen consort and to be her
perpetual chaplain. The archbishop of York takes precedence over all
subjects of the crown not of royal blood, but after the lord high
chancellor of England. He is ex officio an ecclesiastical commissioner
for England (see further ENGLAND, CHURCH OF).

The Church of Ireland had at the time of the Act of Union four
archbishops, who took their titles from Armagh, Dublin, Cashel and Tuam.
By acts of 1833 and 1834, the metropolitans of Cashel and of Tuam were
reduced to the status of diocesan bishops. The two archbishoprics of
Armagh and Dublin are maintained in the disestablished Church of
Ireland.

The title archbishop has been used in certain of the colonial churches,
e.g. Australia, South Africa, Canada, and the West Indies, since 1893,
when it was assumed by the metropolitans of Canada and Rupert's Land
(see ANGLICAN COMMUNION). Archbishops have the title of His (or Your)
Grace and Most Reverend Father in God.

  See Hinschius, _System des katholischen Kirchenrechts_ (Berlin, 1869),
  also article "Erzbischof," in Hauck, _Realencyklopadie_ (1898);
  Phillimore, _The Ecclesiastical Law of the Church of England_, and
  authorities there cited.     (W. A. P.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] In the Roman Church it is safe to say that all metropolitans are
    archbishops. In, e.g., the Scottish and American episcopal churches,
    however, the metropolitan is the senior bishop _pro tem._

  [2] Unless the case of the claim of Mark, bishop of Carlisle, to be
    tried by his ordinary instead of by a temporal court, be a precedent
    (Phillimore, _Eccles. Law_, p. 74, ed. 1895).

  [3] The court of Peculiars is no longer held, inasmuch as the
    peculiars have been placed by acts of parliament under the ordinary
    jurisdiction of the bishops of the respective dioceses in which they
    are situated.