ARCHIL (a corruption of "orchil," Ital. _oricello_, the origin of which
is unknown), a purple dye obtained from various species of lichens.
Archil can be extracted from many species of the genera _Roccella_,
_Lecanora_, _Umbilicaria_, _Parmelia_ and others, but in practice two
species of _Roccella_--_R. tinctoria_ and _R. fuciformis_--are almost
exclusively used. These, under the name of "orchella weed" or "dyer's
moss," are obtained from Angola, on the west coast of Africa, where the
most valuable kinds are gathered; from Cape Verde Islands; from Lima, on
the west coast of South America; and from the Malabar coast of India.
The colouring properties of the lichens do not exist in them ready
formed, but are developed by the treatment to which they are subjected.
A small proportion of a colourless, crystalline principle, termed
orcinol (a dioxytoluene), is found in some, and in all a series of acid
substances, erythric, lecanoric acids, &c. Orcinol in presence of oxygen
and ammonia takes up nitrogen and becomes changed into a purple
substance, orceine (C7H7NO3), which is essentially the basis of all
lichen dyes. Two other colouring-matters, azoerythin and erythroleinic
acid, are sometimes present. Archil is prepared for the dyer's use in
the form of a "liquor" (archil) and a "paste" (persis), and the latter,
when dried and finely powdered, forms the "cudbear" of commerce, a dye
formerly manufactured in Scotland from a native lichen, _Lecanora
tartarea_. The manufacturing process consists in washing the weeds,
which are then ground up with water to a thick paste. If archil paste is
to be made this paste is mixed with a strong ammoniacal solution, and
agitated in an iron cylinder heated by steam to about 140° F. till the
desired shade is developed--a process which occupies several days. In
the preparation of archil liquor the principles which yield the dye are
separated from the ligneous tissue of the lichens, agitated with a hot
ammoniacal solution, and exposed to the action of air. When potassium or
sodium carbonate is added, a blue dye known as litmus, much used as an
"indicator," is produced. French purple or lime lake is a lichen dye
prepared by a modification of the archil process, and is a more
brilliant and durable colour than the other. The dyeing of worsted and
home-spun cloth with lichen dyes was formerly a very common domestic
employment in Scotland; and to this day, in some of the outer islands,
worsted continues to be dyed with "crottle," the name given to the
lichens employed.