ARCHELAUS OF CAPPADOCIA (1st century B.C.), general of Mithradates the
Great in the war against Rome. In 87 B.C. he was sent to Greece with a
large army and fleet, and occupied the Peiraeus after three days'
fighting with Bruttius Sura, prefect of Macedonia, who in the previous
year had defeated Mithradates' fleet under Metrophanes and captured the
island of Sciathus. Here he was besieged by Sulla, compelled to withdraw
into Boeotia, and completely defeated at Chaeroneia (86). A fresh army
was sent by Mithradates, but Archelaus was again defeated at Orchomenus,
after a two days' battle (85). On the conclusion of peace, Archelaus,
finding that he had incurred the suspicion of Mithradates, deserted to
the Romans, by whom he was well received. Nothing further is known of
him.

  Appian, _Mithrid_. 30, 49, 56, 64; Plutarch, _Sulla_, 11, 16-19, 20,
  23; _Lucullus_, 8.

ARCHELAUS, king of Egypt, was his son. In 56 B.C. he married Berenice,
daughter of Ptolemy Auletes, queen of Egypt, but his reign only lasted
six months. He was defeated by Aulus Gabinius and slain (55).

  See Strabo xii. p. 558, xvii. p. 796; Dio Cassius xxxix. 57-58;
  Cicero, _Pro Rabirio_, 8; Hirtius (?), _Bell. Alex_. 66; also
  PTOLEMIES.

ARCHELAUS, king of Cappadocia, was grandson of the last named. In 41
B.C. (according to others, 34), he was made king of Cappadocia by Mark
Antony, whom, however, he deserted after the battle of Actium. Octavian
enlarged his kingdom by the addition of part of Cilicia and Lesser
Armenia. He was not popular with his subjects, who even brought an
accusation against him in Rome, on which occasion he was defended by
Tiberius. Subsequently he was accused by Tiberius, when emperor, of
endeavouring to stir up a revolution, and died in confinement at Rome
(A.D. 17). Cappadocia was then made a Roman province. Archelaus was said
to have been the author of a geographical work, and to have written
treatises _On Stones_ and _Rivers_.

  Strabo xii. p. 540; Suetonius, _Tiberius_, 37, _Caligula_, 1; Dio
  Cassius xlix. 32-51; Tacitus, _Ann_. ii. 42.