ARCH,[1] in building, a constructional arrangement of blocks of any hard
material, so disposed on the lines of some curve that they give mutual
support one to the other.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The blocks, which are technically known as voussoirs, should be of a
wedge shape, the centre or top block (see fig. 1, A) being the keystone
A; the lower blocks B B which rest on the supporting pier are the
springers, the upper surface of which is called the skewback, C C; the
side blocks, as D, are termed the haunches. The lower surface or soffit
of the arch is the intrados, E, and the upper surface the extrados, F.
The rise of the arch is the distance from the springing to the soffit,
G, the width between the springers is called the span, H, and the radius
I. The triangular spaces between the arches are termed spandrils, K.

The arch is employed for two purposes:--(1) to span an opening in a wall
and support the superstructure; (2) when continuous to form a vault
known as a barrel or waggon vault.

The arch has been used from time immemorial by every nation, but owing
to the tendency of the upper portion to sink, especially when bearing
any superincumbent weight, it requires strong lateral support, and it is
for this reason that in the earliest examples in unburnt brick at Nippur
in Chaldaea, _c._ 4000 B.C., and at Rakakna (Requaqna) and Dendera in
Egypt, 3500-3000 B.C., it was employed only below the level of the
ground which served as an abutment on either side.

In the building of an arch, the voussoirs have to be temporarily
supported, until the keystone is inserted. This at the present day is
effected by means of centreing an assemblage of timbers framed together,
with its upper surface of the same form as the arch required; the
voussoirs are laid on the centreing till the ring of the arch is
completed. In the case of arches of small span, such as the early
examples referred to, limited to about 6 ft., such centreing might be
dispensed with in various ways, but it is difficult to see how the
arches of the great entrance gateways, shown in the Assyrian
bas-reliefs, could have been built without temporary support of some
kind. In those days, when any amount of labour could be obtained, even
the erection of a temporary wall might have been less costly than the
employment of timber, of which there was great scarcity.

The Assyrian tradition would seem to have descended first to the
Parthian builders, who in the palace of El Hadr built semicircular
arches with regular voussoirs decoratively treated. The Sassanians who
followed them employed the elliptical or egg-shaped arch, of which the
lower part was built in horizontal courses up to about one-third of the
height, which lessened the span of the arched portion.

In Europe the earliest arches were those built by the Etruscans, either
over canals (see article ARCHITECTURE: _Etruscan_), or in the entrance
gateways of their towns. The skew-arch in the gateway at Perugia shows
great knowledge in its execution. From the Etruscans the adoption of the
arch passed to the Romans, who certainly employed centreing of some
kind, but always economized its use, as is clearly shown by Choisy.
Although their walls from the Augustan age were built in concrete,
arches of brick were always turned over their entrance doorways,
sometimes in two or three rings. The Romans utilized the arch in other
ways, sometimes burying it in their concrete construction, as in their
vaults, and sometimes introducing it as a veneer only, as in the
Pantheon. In their monumental structures in stone, the arch was
sometimes built with regular voussoirs, i.e. with a semicircular
extrados, and sometimes with the joint carried far beyond. The latter
was not done in the early examples of the Tabularium and the Theatre of
Marcellus, but in the Colosseum and all the arches of triumph the joints
run through the spandrils, notwithstanding the recognition of the arch
proper by its moulded archivolt.

Although the value of the pointed arch as a stronger constructional
feature than the semicircular (owing to the tendency to sink in the
keystone of the latter) had been recognized by the Assyrian builders,
who employed it in their drains, it was not used systematically as an
architectural feature till the 9th century, in the mosque of Tulun at
Cairo; it seems to have been regarded by the Mahommedans as an emblem of
their faith, and its use spread through Syria to Persia, was brought to
Sicily from Egypt, and was taken back by the Sicilian masons to
Palestine and employed throughout the Crusaders' churches during the
12th century. As the pointed arch had already, for constructional
reasons, been employed in Périgord from the commencement of the 11th
century, it does not follow that the Crusaders brought it from
Palestine, but there is no doubt that its universal employment in France
early in the 12th century may have been partly due to its adoption in
the Crusaders' churches. At first in Gothic work both the semicircular
and pointed arches were used simultaneously in the same building, the
larger arches being pointed, the smaller ones and windows being
semicircular. The great value of the pointed arch in vaulting is
described in the article VAULT.

We have suggested that the pointed arch became an emblem of Mahommedan
faith, and it was introduced in India but not as a constructive feature,
for the Hindus objected to the arch, which they say _never sleeps_,
meaning that it is always exerting a thrust which tends to its
destruction. In India therefore it was built in horizontal courses with
vertical slabs leaning against one another to form the apex. The Moors
of north Africa, however, never employed it, preferring the horseshoe
arch which they brought into Spain and developed in the mosque of
Cordova. In the additions made to this mosque the prayer chamber was
enriched by the caliph Mansur, who, to eke out the height, raised arch
upon arch. In the Alhambra it appears in the decorative plaster work,
and travels northwards into the south of France, where at Le Puy and
elsewhere it is found decorating doorways and windows; in England it was
employed towards the end of the 12th century.

About the middle of the 14th century at Gloucester the four-centred
pointed arch was introduced, which became afterwards the leading
characteristic feature of the Tudor style. In France they adopted the
three-centred arch in the 15th century.

The ogee arch was the natural result of the development of tracery in
the commencement of the 14th century, and in Gloucester (about 1310) the
foliations were run one into the other without the enclosing circles.
About the middle of the 14th century, in the arcade of the first storey
of the ducal palace in Venice, flowing tracery is found, from which the
ogee arch there was probably derived, as throughout Venice it becomes
the favourite feature in domestic architecture of that and the
succeeding century.

The arches are of various forms as follows:--

[Illustration:

  2. Semicircular arch, the centre of which is in the same line with its
  springers.

  3. Segmental arch, where the centre is below the springing.

  4. Horseshoe arch, with the centre above the springing; employed in
  Moorish architecture.

  5. Stilted arches, where the centre is below the springing, but the
  sides are carried down vertically.

  6. Equilateral pointed arches, described from two centres, the radius
  being the whole width of the arch.

  7. Drop arches, with centres within the arch.

  8. Lancet arches, with centres outside the arch.

  9. Three centre arches, employed in French Flamboyant.

  10. Four centre arches, employed in the Perpendicular and Tudor
  periods.

  11. Ogee arches, with curves of counter flexure, found in English
  Decorated and French Flamboyant.

  12. Pointed horseshoe arches, found in the mosque of Tulun, Cairo, 9th
  century.

  13. Pointed foiled arches, in the arcades of Beverley Minster (_c_.
  1230) and Netley Abbey.

  14. Cusped arch; Christchurch Priory, Hants.

  15. Multifoil cusped arch, invented by the Moors at Cordova in the
  10th century.

  16. Flat arch, where the soffit is horizontal and sometimes slightly
  cambered (dotted line).

  17. Upright elliptical arch, sometimes called the egg-shaped arch,
  employed in Egyptian and Sassanian architecture.

  18. The Tuscan arch, where the extrados takes the form of a pointed
  arch.

  19. The joggled arch used in medieval chimneypieces and in Mahommedan
  architecture.

  20. The discharging or relieving arch, built above the architrave or
  lintel to take off the weight of the superstructure.

  21. The relieving arch as used in Egypt, in the pyramid of Cheops; and
  in Saxon architecture, where it was built with Roman bricks or tiles,
  or consisted of two sloping slabs of stone.]
      (R. P. S.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The ultimate derivation of "arch" is the Latin _arcus_, a bow, or
    arch, in origin meaning something bent, from which through the French
    is also derived "arc," a curve. In French there are two words
    _arche_, one meaning a chest or coffer, from Latin _arca_ (_arcere_,
    to keep close), hence the English "ark"; the other meaning a vaulted
    arch, such as that of a bridge, and derived from a Low Latin
    corruption of _arcus_, into arca (du Cange, _Glossarium_, s.v.). The
    word "arch," prefixed to names of offices, seen in "archbishop,"
    "archdeacon," "archduke," &c., means "principal" or "chief," and
    comes from the Greek prefix [Greek: arx-] or [Greek: arxi-] from
    [Greek: arxein], to begin, lead, or rule; it is also prefixed to
    other words, and usually with words implying hatred or detestation,
    such as "arch-fiend", "arch-scoundrel"; it is from an adaptation of
    this use, as seen in such expressions as "arch-rogue," extended to
    "arch-look," "arch-face," that the word comes to mean a mischievous,
    roguish expression of face or demeanour.