ARCHAEOPTERYX. The name of _Archaeopteryx lithographica_ was based by
Hermann von Meyer upon a feather (Gr. [Greek: pteryx], wing) found in
1861 in the lithographic slate quarries of Solenhofen in Bavaria, the
geological horizon being that of the Kimmeridge clay of the Upper Oolite
or Jurassic system. In the same year and at the same place was
discovered the specimen (figs. 1 and 3) now in the British Museum,
named by Andreas Wagner _Griphosaurus._ Sir R. Owen has described it as
_A. macroura._ Stimulated by the high price paid by the British Museum,
the quarry owners diligently searched, and in 1872 another, much finer,
preserved specimen was found. This was bought by K.W. v. Siemens, who
presented it to the Berlin Museum. The late W. Dames has written an
excellent monograph on it.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--The British Museum specimen.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--The specimen in the Museum für Naturkunde,
Berlin. After a photograph taken from a cast.]

_Archaeopteryx_ was a bird, without any doubt, but still with so many
low, essentially reptilian characters that it forms a link between these
two classes. About the size of a rook, its most obvious peculiarity is
the long reptilian tail, composed of 20 vertebrae and not ending in a
pygostyle. The last dozen vertebrae each carry a pair of well-developed
typical quills. Upon these features of the tail E. Haeckel established
the subclass Saururae, containing solely Archaeopteryx, in opposition to
the Ornithurae, comprising all the other birds. Herein he has been
followed by many zoologists. However, the fact that various recent birds
possess the same kind of caudal skeleton, likewise without a pygostyle,
although reduced to at least 13 vertebrae, shows that the two terms do
not express a fundamental difference.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Tail of British Museum specimen.]

The importance of _Archaeopteryx_ justifies the following descriptive
detail. Vertebral column composed of about 50 vertebrae, viz. 10-11
cervical, 12-11 thoracic, 2 lumbar, 5-6 sacral, and 20 or 21 caudal,
with a total caudal length of the Berlin specimen of 7 in. The cervical
and thoracic vertebrae seem to be biconcave; the cervical ribs are much
reduced and were apparently still movable; the thoracic ribs are devoid
of uncinate processes. Paired abdominal ribs are doubtful. Scarcely
anything is known of the sternum, and little of the shoulder-girdle,
except the very stout furcula; scapula typically bird-like. Humerus
about 2½ in. long, with a strong crista lateralis, which indicates a
strongly developed great pectoral muscle and hence, by inference, the
presence of a keel to the sternum. Radius and ulna typically avine, 2.1
in. in length. Carpus with two separate bones. The hand skeleton
consists of 3 completely separate metacarpals, each carrying a complete,
likewise free, finger; the shortened thumb with 2, the index with 3, the
third with 4 phalanges; each finger with a curved claw. The whole wing
is consequently, although essentially avine, still reptilian in the
unfused state of the metacarpals and the numbers of the phalanges. The
pelvis is imperfectly known. The preacetabular portion of the ilium is
shorter than the posterior half. The hind-limb is typically avine, with
intertarsal joint, distally reduced fibula, and the three elongated
metatarsals which show already considerable anchylosis; reduction of the
toes to four, with 2, 3, 4 and 5 phalanges; the hallux is separate, and
as usual in recent birds posterior in position. Skull bird-like, except
that the short bill cannot have been enclosed in a horny rhamphotheca,
since the upper jaw shows a row of 13, the lower jaw 3 conical teeth,
all implanted in distinct sockets.

The remiges and rectrices indicate perfect feathers, with shaft and
complete vanes which were so neatly finished that they must have
possessed typical radii and hooklets. Some of the quills measure fully 5
in. in length. Six or seven remiges were attached to the hand, ten to
the ulna.

It is idle to speculate on the habits of this earliest of known birds.
That it could fly is certain, and the feet show it to have been well
adapted to arboreal life. The clawed slender fingers did not make
_Archaeopteryx_ any more quadrupedal or bat-like in its habits than is a
kestrel hawk, with its equally large, or even larger thumb-claw.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--H. v. Meyer, _Neues Jahrb.f. Mineralog._ (1861), p.
  679; Sir R. Owen, "On the Archaeopteryx von Meyer ..." _Phil. Trans._,
  1863, pp. 33-47, pls. i.-iv.; T.H. Huxley, "Remarks on the Skeleton of
  the Archaeopteryx and on the relations of the bird to the reptile,"
  _Geol. Mag. i._, 1864, pp. 55-57; C. Vogt, "L'Archaeopteryx macrura,"
  _Revue scient. de la France et de l'étranger_, 1879, pp. 241-248; W.
  Dames, "Über Archaeopteryx," _Palaeontol. Abhandl._ ii. (Berlin,
  1884); _Idem_, "Über Brustbein Schulter- und Beckengürtel der
  Archaeopteryx," _Math. naturw. Mitth._ Berlin. vii. (1897), pp.
  476-492.     (H. F. G.)