ARCHES, COURT OF, the English ecclesiastical court of appeal of the
archbishop of Canterbury, as metropolitan of the province of Canterbury,
from all the consistory and commissary courts in the province. It
derives its name from its ancient place of judicature, which was in the
church of _Beata Maria de Arcubus_ --St Mary-le-Bow or St Mary of the
Arches, "by reason of the steeple thereof raised at the top with stone
pillars in fashion like a bow bent archwise." This parish was the chief
of thirteen locally situated within the diocese of London but exempt
from the bishop's jurisdiction, and it was no doubt owing to this
circumstance that it was selected originally as the place of judicature
for the archbishop's court. The proper designation of the judge is
official principal of the Arches court, but by custom he came to be
styled the dean of the Arches, a title belonging formerly to the chief
official of the subordinate court. Originally, the official principal
exercised metropolitan jurisdiction, while the dean of the Arches
exercised the "peculiar" jurisdiction. The jurisdictions called
"peculiars" at one time numbered nearly 300 in England. They were
originally introduced by the pope for the purpose of curtailing the
bishop's legitimate authority within his diocese; "an object which,"
says Phillimore, "they certainly attained, to the great confusion of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction for many years." The dean of the Arches
originally had jurisdiction over the thirteen London parishes above
mentioned, but as the official principal was often absent as ambassador
on the continent, he became his substitute, and gradually the two
offices were blended together. The original office of the dean of the
Arches may now be regarded as extinct, though the title is still
popularly used, for no dean of the Arches has been appointed _eo nomine_
for several centuries, and by an act of 1838 bishops have jurisdiction
over all peculiars within their diocese. The judge of the Arches court
was until 1874 appointed by the archbishop of Canterbury by patent
which, when confirmed by the dean and chapter of Canterbury, conferred
the office for the life of the holder. He took the oaths of office
required by the 127th canon. But by the Public Worship Regulation Act
1874 the two archbishops were empowered, subject to the approval of the
sovereign by sign-manual, from time to time to appoint a practising
barrister of ten years' standing, or a person who had been a judge of
one of the superior courts (being a member of the Church of England) to
be, during good behaviour, a judge for the purpose of exercising
jurisdiction under that act, and it was enacted (sec. 7) that on a
vacancy occurring in the office of official principal of the Arches
court the judge should become _ex officio_ such official principal. In
this way the late Lord Penzance became dean on the retirement of Sir
Robert Phillimore in 1875. Lord Penzance received in 1878 a supplemental
patent as dean from Archbishop Tait, but did not otherwise fulfil the
conditions observed on the appointment of his predecessors. On Lord
Penzance's retirement in 1899, his successor, Sir Arthur Charles,
received a patent from the archbishop of Canterbury as official
principal of the Arches court, and he took the oaths of office according
to the practice before the Public Worship Regulation Act. He was
subsequently and separately appointed judge under that act. Sir A.
Charles resigned in 1903 and was succeeded by Sir L.T. Dibdin, who
qualified in the same way as his immediate predecessor. The official
principal of the Arches court is the only ecclesiastical judge who is
empowered to pass a sentence of deprivation against a clerk in holy
orders. The appeals from the decisions of the Arches court were formerly
made to the king in chancery, but they are now by statute addressed to
the king in council, and they are heard before the judicial committee of
the privy council. By an act of Henry VIII. (Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
Act 1532) the Arches court is empowered to hear, in the first instance,
such suits as are sent up to it by letters of request from the
consistorial courts of the bishops of the province of Canterbury, and by
the Church Discipline Act 1840, this jurisdiction is continued to it,
and it is further empowered to accept letters of request from the
bishops of the province of Canterbury after they have issued commissions
of inquiry under that statute, and the commissioners have made their
report.

The Arches court was also the court of appeal from the consistory courts
of the bishops of the province in all testamentary and matrimonial
causes. The matrimonial jurisdiction was transferred to the crown by the
Matrimonial Causes Act 1857. Under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892 an
appeal lies from the judgment of a consistory court under that act, in
respect of fact by leave of the appellate court, and in respect of law
without leave, to either the Arches court or the judicial committee of
the privy council at the option of the appellant. Under the Benefices
Act 1898 the official principal of the archbishop is required to
institute a presentee to a benefice if the tribunal constituted under
that act decides that there is no valid ground for refusing institution
and the bishop of the diocese notwithstanding fails to institute him.
After the College of Advocates was incorporated and had established
itself in Doctors' Commons, the archbishop's court of appeal, as well as
his prerogative court, were usually held in the hall of the College of
Advocates, but after the destruction of the buildings of the college,
the court of appeal held its sittings, for the most part, in Westminster
Hall. For many years past there has been but little business in the
Arches court, mainly owing to the unwillingness of a large number of the
clergy to recognize the jurisdiction of what they deny to be any longer
a spiritual court, and the consistent use by the bishops of their right
of veto in the case of prosecutions under the Public Worship Regulation
Act. On the rare occasions when a sitting of the court is necessary, it
is held in the library of Lambeth Palace, or at the Church House,
Westminster.