ARCHANGEL (ARCHANGELSK), a government of European Russia, bounded N. by
the White Sea and Arctic Ocean, W. by Finland and Olonets, S. by
Vologda, and E. by the Ural mountains. It comprehends the islands of
Novaya-Zemlya, Vaygach and Kolguev, and the peninsula of Kola. Its area
is 331,505 sq. m., and its population in 1867 was 275,779 and in 1897,
349,943. The part which lies within the Arctic Circle is very desolate
and sterile, consisting chiefly of sand and reindeer moss. The winter is
long and severe, and even in summer the soil is frozen. The rivers
(Tuloma, Onega, Dvina, Mezen and Pechora) are closed in September and
scarcely thaw before July. The Kola peninsula is, however, diversified
by hills exceeding 3000 ft. in altitude and by large lakes (e.g.
Imandra), and its coast enjoys a much more genial climate. South of the
Arctic Circle the greater part of the country is covered with forests,
intermingled with lakes and morasses, though in places there is
excellent pasturage. Here the spring is moist, with cold, frosty nights;
the summer a succession of long foggy days; the autumn again moist. The
rivers are closed from October to April. The inhabitants of the northern
districts--nomad tribes of Samoyedes, Zyryans, Lapps, and the Finnish
tribes of Karelians and Chudes--support themselves by fishing and
hunting. In the southern districts hemp and flax are raised, but grain
crops are little cultivated, so that the bark of trees has often to be
ground up to eke out the scanty supply of flour. Potatoes are grown as
far north as 65°. Shipbuilding is carried on, and the forests yield
timber, pitch and tar. Excellent cattle are raised in the district of
Kholmogory on the Dvina, veal being supplied to St Petersburg. Gold is
found in the districts of Kola, naphtha and salt in those of Kem and
Pinega, and lignite in Mezen. Sulphurous springs exist in the districts
of Kholmogory and Shenkursk. The industry and commerce are noticed below
in the article on the town Archangel, which is the capital. The
government is divided into nine districts, the chief towns of which
are--Alexandrovsk or Kola (pop. 300), Archangel (q.v.), Kem (1825),
Kholmogory (1465), Mezen (2040), Novaya-Zemlya (island), Pechora, Pinega
(1000) and Shenkursk (1308).

  See A.P. Engelhardt, _A Russian Province of the North_ (Eng. trans.,
  by H. Cooke, 1899).