ARCHON ([Greek: archon], ruler), the title of the highest magistrate in
many ancient Greek states. It is only in Athens that we have any
detailed knowledge of the office, and even in this one case the evidence
presents problems of the first importance which are incapable of
decisive solution. There is no doubt that the archons represented the
ancient kings, whose absolutism, under conditions which we can only
infer, yielded in process of time to the power of the noble families,
supported no doubt by the fighting force of the state. As to the process
by which this change was effected there are two accounts. Traditionally,
the monarchy after the death of Codrus (?1068 B.C.) gave place to the
life archon whose tenure of office was limited afterwards to ten years
and then to one year. Aristotle's _Constitution of Athens_ (q.v.) speaks
of five stages: (1) the institution of the polemarch who took over the
military duties of the king; (2) the institution of _the_ archon to
relieve the king of his civil duties; (3) the tenure of office was
reduced to ten years (?752 B.C.); (4) the office was taken from the
"royal" clan and thrown open to all Eupatridae (?712 B.C.); (5) office
was made annual, and to the existing three offices were added the six
thesmothetae whose duty it was to record judicial decisions. The value
of this latter account is, of course, debatable, but it is at least
compatible with the general trend of development from hereditary
absolutism, civil, military and religious, in the person of the "king,"
to a constitutional oligarchy. The change was clearly effected by the
devolution of the military and civil powers of the king to the polemarch
and the archon, while the archon basileus (or king) retained control of
state religion. It is equally clear that owing to the predominating
importance of civil affairs, _the_ archon became the chief state
official and gave his name to the year (hence archon eponymus). It
should be noticed that the analogy which has often been suggested
between the early history of the archonship at Athens, and such cases as
the mayors of the palace in French history, or the tycoon (shogun) and
mikado in Japanese history, is misleading. In these cases it is the old
royal house that retains the royal title and the semblance of power,
while the real authority passes into new hands. In Athens, the new civil
office is vested in the old royal family, while the old title along with
its religious functions is transferred. The early history of the
thesmothetae is not clear, but this much is certain that there is no
adequate reason for supposing, as many historians do, that in early
times, they, with the three chief archons, constituted a collective or
collegiate magistracy. It is true Thucydides (i. 126) states that, in
the time of the Cylonian conspiracy (?632 B.C.), "the nine archons were
(i.e. collectively) the principal officials," but at the same time the
responsibility for the action then taken attached to the Alcmaeonidae
alone, because one of their number, Megacles, was at that time _the_
archon (i.e. responsibility was personal, not collective). Again, the
_Constitution of Athens_ says that down to Solon's time the archons had
no official residence, but that afterwards they used the Thesmotheteion.
It is a reasonable inference from this statement that the thesmothetae
had previously sat together apart from the superior archons and that it
was only after Solon that collegiate responsibility began.

_Evolution of the Office._--The history of the democratization of the
archonship is beset with equal difficulty. In the early days, the
importance of the office (confined as it was to the highest class) must
have been immense; there was no audit, no written law, no executive
council. The popular assembly was ill-organized and probably summoned by
the archons themselves. The only control came from the Areopagus which
elected them and would generally be favourably disposed, and from the
fact that the military and civil powers were not vested in the same
hands. Although the institution of the popular courts by Solon had
within it the germ of democratic supremacy, it is clear that the
immediate result was small; thus, in the next decade _anarchia_ was
continuous and Damasias held the archonship for more than two years in
defiance of the new constitution; the prolonged dissension in this
matter shows that the office of archon still retained its supreme
importance. Gradually, however, the archonship lost its power,
especially in judicial matters, until it retained merely the right of
holding the preliminary investigation and the formal direction of the
popular courts. Its administrative powers, save those wielded by the
polemarch (see below and cf. STRATEGUS), dwindled away into matters of
routine. We know that Peisistratus ruled by controlling the archonship,
which was always held by members of his family, and the archonship of
Isagoras was clearly an important party victory; we know further the
names of three important men who held the office between Cleisthenes'
reform and the Persian War (Hipparchus, Themistocles (q.v.), Aristides)
from which we infer that the office was still the prize of party
competition. On the other hand, after 487 B.C. the list of archons
contains no name of importance. Presumably this is due to the growing
importance of the Strategus and to the institution of sortition (see
below), which, whether as cause or effect, is presumably by the 5th
century indicative of diminished importance. There can, on these
assumptions, be no doubt that, from the early years of the 5th century
B.C., the archonship was of practically no importance. Furthermore we
find that (probably after the Persian War) the office is thrown open to
the second class, and finally in 457 B.C. we meet an archon,
Mnesitheides, of the third, or Zeugite, class. Plutarch (_Aristides_,
22) says that after the great struggle of the Persian War Aristides
threw open the office to all the citizens. But in fact the members of
the fourth class were not formally admitted even in the 4th century
(though by a fiction they were allowed to pose for the time as
Zeugites). Furthermore it is not till 457 that even a Zeugite archon is
known, according to the _Constitution of Athens_ (_c_. 26), which dates
the change as five years after the death of Ephialtes and does not
connect it with Aristides.

_Sortition._--The next question constitutes perhaps the most important
problem in Greek political development. At what date was election by
lot, or sortition, introduced for the archonship? From the _Constitution
of Athens_ (_c_. 22) we gather that from the fall of the Tyranny to 487
B.C. the archons were [Greek: airetoi], not [Greek: klaerotoi] (i.e.
chosen by vote, not by lot), and that in 487, limited sortition was
introduced, whereby fifty candidates were elected by each tribe, and
from these the archons and their "secretary" were chosen by lot. But
against this must be set the statement by the same authority that this
double method was part of the Solonian reform. The solution of the
dilemma is a matter of inference. Three indications favour the former
view: (1) the "anarchia" which occurred so often between Solon and
Peisistratus shows that the office was at that time a question of party
(i.e. elective); (2) the statement that Solon invented sortition for the
office is put as the basis of a comparison ([Greek: othen, saemeion])
and, therefore, may fairly be regarded as a hypothesis; (3) there is no
indication that the change made in 487 B.C. was a return to an obsolete
method, and on the same argument it is odd that Solon's alleged system
should not have been revived at the end of the Tyranny. On the other
hand Herodotus (vi. 109) states that, in 490, before the battle of
Marathon, the polemarch was chosen by lot. If this be true, it follows
that the office of polemarch must have lost its military importance,
which was not the case, inasmuch as the polemarch at Marathon gave the
casting vote in favour of immediate battle. Whether, therefore, Solon or
Aristides was the first to introduce sortition, it is perfectly clear
that the lot was not used between the Tyranny and 487 B.C. and that
after 487 the lot was always used (see J.E. Sandys, _Constitution of
Athens_ c. 8 note 1, c. 22 § 5, note); in fact, at a date not known the
mixed system of Aristides gave place to double sortition, in which the
first nomination also was by lot. To enter here into the theory of the
lot is impossible. It should, however, be observed that in the somewhat
material atmosphere of constitutional Athens the religious significance
of the lot had vanished; no important office in the 5th and 4th
centuries was entrusted to its decision. The real effect of sortition
was to equalize the chances of rich and poor without civil strife. Now
it is perfectly clear that it could not have been this object which
impelled Solon to introduce sortition; for in his time the archonship
was not open to the lower classes, and, therefore, election was more
democratic than sortition, whereas later the case was reversed. It
should further be mentioned that, before the discovery of the
Aristotelian _Constitution_ in 1891, Grote, C.F. Hermann, Busolt and
others had maintained that the lot was not used in Athens before the
time of Cleisthenes; and in spite of the treatise, it must be admitted
that there is no satisfactory evidence, historical or inferential, that
their theory was unsound.

_Qualifications and Functions._--It remains to give a brief analysis of
the qualifications and functions of the archons after the year 487 B.C.
After election (in the time of Aristotle in the month Anthesterion; in
the 3rd century in Munychion) a short time had to elapse before entering
on office to allow of the _dokimasia_ (examination of fitness). In this
the whole life of the nominee was investigated, and each had to prove
that he was physically without flaw. Failure to pass the scrutiny
involved a certain loss of civic rights (e.g. that of addressing the
people). The successful candidate had to take an oath to the people
(that he would not take bribes, &c.) and to go through certain
preliminary rites. Any citizen could bring an impeachment (_eisangelia_)
against the archons. Any delinquency involved a trial before the
Heliaea. Finally an examination took place at the end of the year of
office, when each archon had to answer for his actions with person and
possessions; till then he could not leave the country, be adopted into
another family, dispose of his property, nor receive any "crown of
honour." A similar investigation took place with regard to the assessors
(_paredri_) whom the three senior archons chose to assist them. The
archons at the end of their year of office (some say on entering upon
office) became members of the Areopagus, which was, therefore, a body
composed of ex-archons of tried probity and wisdom. The archons as a
body retained some duties such as the appointment of jurymen, the
sortition of the _athlothetae_, &c. (but see Gilbert's _Antiquities_,
Eng. trans., p. 251, n. 1). On entering upon office the archon (_archon
eponymus_) made proclamation by his herald that he would not interfere
with private property. His official residence was the Prytaneum where he
presided over all questions of family, e.g. the protection of parents
against children and _vice versa_, protection of widows, wardship of
heiresses and orphans, divorce; in religious matters he superintended
the Dionysia, the Thargelia, the processions in honour of Zeus the
Saviour and Asclepius. The archon basileus superintended the holy
places, the mysteries, the Lampadephoria (Torch race), &c., questions of
national religion and certain cases of bloodguiltiness. His official
residence was the Stoa Basileios, and his wife, as officially
representing the wife of Dionysus, was called Basilinna. The polemarch,
who was at any rate titular commander down to about 487 B.C. (see above;
and Herod, vi. 109, [Greek: hendekatos psaephidophoros]), became in the
5th century a sort of consul who watched over the rights of resident
aliens (_metoeci_) in their family and legal affairs. He offered
sacrifices to Artemis Agrotera and Enyalios, superintended _epitaphia_
and arranged for the annual honours paid to the tyrannicides. His
official residence was the Epilyceum (formerly called the
Polemarcheion).

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.-G. Gilbert, _Constitutional Antiquities_ (Eng. trans.,
  1895); Eduard Meyer's _Geschichte des Alterthums_, ii. sect. 228;
  A.H.J. Greenidge, _Handbook of Greek Constitutional Hist._ (1895);
  J.W. Headlam, _Election by Lot in Athens_ (Camb., 1891); and
  authorities quoted under GREECE: _History, ancient_, and ATHENS:
  _History_.     (J. M. M.)