ARCHCHANCELLOR (Lat. _Archicancellarius_; Ger. _Erzkanzler_), or chief
chancellor, a title given to the highest dignitary of the Holy Roman
Empire, and also used occasionally during the middle ages to denote an
official who supervised the work of chancellors or notaries.

In the 9th century Hincmar, archbishop of Reims, in his work, _De ordine
palatii et regni_, speaks of a _summus cancellarius_, evidently an
official at the court of the Carolingian emperors and kings. A charter
of the emperor Lothair I. dated 844 refers to Agilmar, archbishop of
Vienne, as archchancellor, and there are several other references to
archchancellors in various chronicles. This office existed in the German
kingdom of Otto the Great, and about this time it appears to have become
an appanage of the archbishopric of Mainz. When the Empire was restored
by Otto in 962, a separate chancery seems to have been organized for
Italian affairs, and early in the 11th century the office of
archchancellor for the kingdom of Italy was in the hands of the
archbishop of Cologne. The theory was that all the imperial business in
Germany was supervised by the elector of Mainz, and for Italy by the
elector of Cologne. However, the duties of archchancellor for Italy were
generally discharged by deputy, and after the virtual separation of
Italy and Germany, the title alone was retained by the elector. When the
kingdom of Burgundy or Arles was acquired by the emperor Conrad II. in
1032 it is possible that a separate chancery was established for this
kingdom. However this may be, during the 12th century the elector of
Trier took the title of archchancellor for the kingdom of Arles,
although it is doubtful if he ever performed any duties in connexion
with this office. This threefold division of the office of imperial
archchancellor was acknowledged in 1356 by the Golden Bull of the
emperor Charles IV., but the duties of the office were performed by the
elector of Mainz. The office in this form was part of the constitution
of the Empire until 1803 when the archbishopric of Mainz was
secularized. The last elector, Karl Theodor von Dalberg, however,
retained the title of archchancellor until the dissolution of the Empire
in 1806. H. Reincke in _Der alte Reichstag und der neue Bundesrat_
(Tübingen, 1906) points out a marked resemblance between the medieval
archchancellor and the German imperial chancellor of the present day.

  See du Cange, _Glossarium_, s. "Archicancellarius"; and CHANCELLOR.