ARCHYTAS (c. 428-347 B.C.), of Tarentum, Greek philosopher and scientist
of the Pythagorean school, famous as the intimate friend of Plato, was
the son of Mnesagoras or Histiaeus. Equally distinguished in natural
science, philosophy and the administration of civic affairs, he takes a
high place among the versatile savants of the ancient Greek world. He
was a man of high character and benevolent disposition, a fine
flute-player, and a generous master to his slaves, for whose children he
invented the rattle. He took a prominent part in state affairs, and,
contrary to precedent, was seven times elected commander of the army.
Under his leadership, Tarentum fought with unvarying success against the
Messapii, Lucania and even Syracuse. After a life of high intellectual
achievement and uninterrupted public service, he was drowned (according
to a tradition suggested by Horace, _Odes_, i. 28) on a voyage across
the Adriatic, and was buried, as we are told, at Matinum in Apulia. He
is described as the eighth leader of the Pythagorean school, and was a
pupil (not the teacher, as some have maintained) of Philolaus. In
mathematics, he was the first to draw up a methodical treatment of
mechanics with the aid of geometry; he first distinguished harmonic
progression from arithmetical and geometrical progressions. As a
geometer he is classed by Eudemus, the greatest ancient authority, among
those who "have enriched the science with original theorems, and given
it a really sound arrangement." He evolved an ingenious solution of the
duplication of the cube, which shows considerable knowledge of the
generation of cylinders and cones. The theory of proportion, and the
study of acoustics and music were considerably advanced by his
investigations. He was said to be the inventor of a kind of
flying-machine, a wooden pigeon balanced by a weight suspended from a
pulley, and set in motion by compressed air escaping from a valve.[1]
Fragments of his ethical and metaphysical writings are quoted by
Stobaeus, Simplicius and others. To portions of these Aristotle has been
supposed to have been indebted for his doctrine of the categories and
some of his chief ethical theories. It is, however, certain that these
fragments are mainly forgeries, attributable to the eclecticism of the
1st or 2nd century A.D., of which the chief characteristic was a desire
to father later doctrines on the old masters. Such fragments as seem to
be authentic are of small philosophical value. It is important to notice
that Archytas must have been famous as a philosopher, inasmuch as
Aristotle wrote a special treatise (not extant) _On the Philosophy of
Archytas_. Some positive idea of his speculations may be derived from
two of his observations: the one in which he notices that the parts of
animals and plants are in general rounded in form, and the other dealing
with the sense of hearing, which, in virtue of its limited receptivity,
he compares with vessels, which when filled can hold no more. Two
important principles are illustrated by these thoughts, (1) that there
is no absolute distinction between the organic and the inorganic, and
(2) that the argument from final causes is no explanation of phenomena.
Archytas may be quoted as an example of Plato's perfect ruler, the
philosopher-king, who combines practical sagacity with high character
and philosophic insight.

  See G. Hartenstein, _De Arch. Tar. frag._ (Leipzig, 1833); O.F.
  Gruppe, _Über d. Frag. d. Arch._ (1840); F. Beckmann, _De Pythag.
  reliq._ (Berlin, 1844, 1850); Egger, _De Arch. Tar. vit., op. phil._;
  Ed. Zeller, _Phil. d. Griech._; Theodor Gomperz, _Greek Thinkers_, ii.
  259 (Eng. trans. G.G. Berry, Lond., 1905); G.J. Allman, _Greek
  Geometry from Thales to Euclid_ (1889); Florian Cajori, _History of
  Mathematics_ (New York, 1894); M. Cantor, _Gesch. d. gr. Math._ (1894
  foll.). The mathematical fragments are collected by Fr. Blass,
  _Mélanges Graux_ (Paris, 1884). For Pythagorean mathematics see
  further PYTHAGORAS.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] If this be the proper translation of Aulus Gellius, _Noctes
    Atticae_, x. 12., 9, " ... simulacrum columbae e ligno ... factum;
    ita erat scilicet libramentis suspensum et aura spiritus inclusa
    atque occulta concitum." (See AERONAUTICS.)