ARCHAEOLOGY (from Gr. [Greek: archaia], ancient things, and [Greek:
logos], theory or science), a general term for the study of antiquities.
The precise application of the term has varied from time to time with
the progress of knowledge, according to the character of the subjects
investigated and the purpose for which they were studied. At one time it
was thought improper to use it in relation to any but the artistic
remains of Greece and Rome, i.e. the so-called _classical archaeology_
(now dealt with in this encyclopaedia under the headings of GREEK ART
and ROMAN ART); but of late years it has commonly been accepted as
including the whole range of ancient human activity, from the first
traceable appearance of man on the earth to the middle ages. It may thus
be conceived how vast a field archaeology embraces, and how intimately
it is connected with the sciences of geology (q.v.) and anthropology
(q.v.), while it naturally includes within its borders the consideration
of all the civilizations of ancient times.

In dealing with so vast a subject, it becomes necessary to distinguish.
The archaeology of zoological species constitutes the sphere of
palaeontology (q.v.), while that of botanical species is dealt with as
palaeobotany (q.v.); and every different science thus has its
archaeological side. For practical purposes it is now convenient to
separate the sphere of archaeology in its relation to the study of the
purely _artistic_ character of ancient remains, from that of the
investigation of these remains as an instrument for arriving at
conclusions as to the political and social _history_ of the nations of
antiquity; and in this work the former is regarded primarily as "art"
and dealt with in the articles devoted to the history of art or the
separate arts, while "archaeology" is particularly regarded as the study
of the evidences for the history of mankind, whether or not the remains
are themselves artistically and aesthetically valuable. In this sense a
knowledge of the archaeology is part of the materials from which every
historical article in this encyclopaedia is constructed, and in recent
years no subject has been more fertile in yielding information than
"archaeology," as representing the work of trained excavators and
students of antiquity in all parts of the world, but notably in the
countries round the Mediterranean. It is for its services in
illuminating the days before those of documentary history and for
checking and reinforcing the evidence of the raw material (the
"unwritten history" of architecture, tombs, art-products, &c.), that
recent archaeological work has been so notable. The work of the literary
critic and historian has been amplified by the spade-work of the expert
excavator and explorer to an extent undreamt of by former generations;
and ancient remains, instead of being treated merely as interesting
objects of art, have been forced to give up their secret to the
historian, as evidence for the period, character and affiliations of the
peoples who produced and used them. The increase of precise knowledge of
the past, due to greater opportunities of topographical research, more
care and observation in dealing with ancient remains and improved
methods of studying them in museums (q.v.) and collections, has led to
more accurate reading of results by a comparison of views, under the
auspices of learned societies and institutions, thus raising archaeology
from among the more empirical branches of learning into the region of
the more exact sciences. This change has improved not only the status of
archaeology but also its material, for the higher standard of work now
demanded necessarily acts as a deterrent on the poorly equipped worker,
and the tendency is for the general result to be of a higher quality.

The archaeological details concerning all subjects which have their
"unwritten history" are dealt with in the separate articles in this
work, including the ancient civilizations of Assyria, Egypt and other
countries and peoples, while the articles on separate sites where
excavations have been particularly noteworthy may be referred to for
their special interest; see also ANTHROPOLOGY; ETHNOLOGY, &c. It remains
here to deal generally with the early conditions of the prehistoric
ancient world in their broader aspects, which constitute the
starting-place for the archaeologist in various parts of the world at
different times, and the foundations of our present understanding of the
primitive epochs in the history of man.

  Quaternary period.

The beginning of archaeology, as the study of pre-documentary history,
may be broadly held to follow on the last of the geological periods,
viz., the Quaternary, though it is claimed, and with some reason, that
traces of man have been found in deposits of the preceding or Tertiary
period. Although there is no valid reason against the existence of
Tertiary man, it must be confessed that the evidence in favour of the
belief is of a very inconclusive and unconvincing kind. The discussion
has been mainly confined to the two questions (1) whether the deposit
containing the relics was without doubt of Tertiary times, and (2)
whether the objects found showed undoubted signs of human workmanship.
Vast quantities of material have been brought forward, and endless
discussions have taken place, but hitherto without carrying entire
conviction to the minds of the more serious and cautious students of
prehistoric archaeology. A chronic difficulty, and one which can never
be entirely removed, is our ignorance of the precise methods of nature's
working. It is an obvious fact, that natural forces, such as glacial
action, earthquakes, landslips and the like, must crush and chip flints
and break up animal remains, grinding and scratching them in masses of
gravel or sand. If it were possible to determine with precision what'
were the peculiarities of the flint or bone, thus altered by natural
agencies, it would be easy to separate them from others purposely made
by man to serve some useful end. Our present knowledge, however, does
not allow us to go so far in dealing with the ruder early attempts of
man to fabricate weapons or implements. Even the one feature that is
commonly held to determine human agency, the "bulb of percussion,"
cannot be considered satisfactory, without collateral evidence of some
kind. Flint breaks with what is called a conchoidal fracture, as do many
other substances, such as glass. Thus on the face of a flint flake, at
the end where the blow was delivered to detach it from the nodule, is
seen a lump or bulb, which is usually regarded as evidence of human
workmanship. To produce such a bulb it is necessary to deliver a
somewhat heavy blow of a peculiar kind at a particular point of a
flattened surface; and the operation requires a certain amount of
practice. The fulfilment of all the necessary conditions might well be a
rare occurrence in nature, and the bulb of percussion has come to be
regarded as the hall-mark of human manufacture; but recent
investigations have shown that the intervention of man is not necessary
and that natural forces frequently produce a similar result. When,
therefore, it is a question whether or no a group of rude flints are of
human workmanship, evidence of design or purpose in their forms must be
established. If this be found, and in addition if a number of flints,
all having this character of design, be found together, then and then
only is it safe to admit them into the domain of archaeology. There can
be no doubt that much time and energy have been wasted, and a number of
intelligent workers have been fruitlessly occupied in following up
archaeological will-o'-the-wisps, through neglecting this elementary
precaution.

  Eolithic.

Whether or no man produced flint implements before Quaternary times, it
would seem to be a necessity that he should have passed through an
earlier stage, before arriving at the precision of workmanship and the
fixed types found in the old Stone Age deposits known as palaeolithic.
It is now claimed that this earlier and ruder stage has actually been
discovered in what are known as the Plateau-gravels of Kent, in Belgium,
and even in Egypt, and the name of eolithic ([Greek: eos], dawn, [Greek:
lithos], stone) has been bestowed upon them. The controversy as to the
human character has been very keen, some alleging that the fractured
edges and even the definite and fairly constant types are entirely
produced by natural forces. Sir Joseph Prestwich in England, and Alfred
Rutot in Belgium, the latter arguing from his own discoveries in that
country, have strongly supported the artificial character of the relics.
On the other hand it is pointed out that the existence of these
implements on the high levels of Kent furnished confirmation of Sir
Joseph Prestwich's theory of the submergence of the district, and that
his support was thus somewhat biassed, while the geological conditions
in Belgium are not quite comparable with those of the Kent plateau; and
the Belgian evidence, whatever it may be worth in itself, is of no avail
as corroboration of the Kentish case. It is to be regretted that the
conditions are not more convincing, for, as stated above, they agree
fairly well with the evolution theory of man's handiwork, and if they
could be accepted, would carry back the evidences to a more remote time
when the physical features of Kent were of a very different character.
The critics of eoliths have brought forward some facts that at first
sight would seem to be of a very damaging nature. It was observed that
in the process of cement manufacture the flints that had passed through
a rotary machine in which they were violently struck by its teeth or
knocked against each other, possessed just those features that were
claimed as indisputable proof of man's handiwork, and that even the
forms were the same. These statements have, of course, been met by
counter-statements equally forcible, and the matter may still be
considered to be in suspense. The great struggle, therefore, is now more
closely restricted to the nature of the chipping than as to the
quasi-geological question, and if the solution is ever to be found, it
will be by means of a closer examination and a better understanding of
the difference between intentional and accidental flaking.

  Palaeolithic.

On reaching the Palaeolithic period we come to firmer ground and to
evidence that is more certain and generally accepted. This evidence is
fundamentally geological, inasmuch as the age of the archaeological
remains is dependent upon that of the beds in which they are found. That
they were deposited at the same time is now no longer questioned. The
flints are found to have the same colour and surface characteristics as
the unworked nodules among which they lie, and are generally rolled and
abraded in the same way. This in itself suffices to show that the worked
and unworked flints were deposited in their present stratigraphical
position at the same time. The remote age of the beds themselves is
demonstrated by the presence of bones of animals either now extinct or
found only in far distant latitudes, such as the mammoth, reindeer,
rhinoceros, &c., and in some cases these bones are found in such
relative positions as to prove they were deposited with the flesh still
adhering to them, and also that the animal was contemporary with the
makers of the flint implements. Evidence of a somewhat different kind is
provided for the palaeolithic period by certain caverns that have been
discovered in England and on the continent. In these limestone caves
palaeolithic man has lived, slept, eaten his food and made his tools and
weapons. Much of his handiwork has been left, with the bones of animals
on which he lived, scattered upon the floor of the cave, and has been
sealed up by the infiltration of lime-charged water, so that the deposit
remains, untouched to our own day, below an impermeable bed of
stalagmite. In such circumstances there can be no doubt of the
contemporaneous character of the remains, natural or artificial, if
found on the same level. Moreover, so far as type is a criterion of age,
the flint tools found in the cave deposits tend to confirm the date
assigned to those of the river-gravels.

It is fairly certain that about the middle of the Tertiary period the
northern hemisphere possessed a temperate climate, such that even the
polar regions were habitable. But the physical aspect of northern Europe
was very different from that of Quaternary times. North of a line drawn
roughly from southern England to St Petersburg all was sea. It was
during the latter half of the Tertiary period that the continent assumed
its present general form, though even in Pleistocene (Quaternary) times
England and Ireland formed part of it. The great change of climate from
temperate to arctic conditions during the latter half of the Tertiary
period has been interpreted in various ways, no one of which is yet
universally accepted. There can be little doubt, however, that no single
cause was responsible for so complete a change. There may have been some
alteration in the relative positions of the earth and the sun, which
would conceivably have produced it; but what is practically certain is
that the physical geography of northern Europe was affected by
considerable difference in level, and it is clear that the raising of
mountain ranges and the general elevation of the continent must
necessarily have reacted on the climatic conditions. If in the later
Tertiary time we find that the Alps, the Carpathians and the Caucasus
have come into existence, it is not surprising to find that these huge
condensers have brought about a humid condition of the continent to such
an extent that this phase has been called the Pluvial Age. The humidity,
however, was in some ways only a secondary result of the protrusion of
high mountain ranges. The primary cause of the physical conditions that
we now find in the valleys and plains was the formation of glaciers.
These rivers of ice descending far into the lower levels during the
winter months, melted during the summer, causing enormous volumes of
water to rush through the valleys and over the plains, carrying with it
masses of mud and boulders which were left stranded sometimes at immense
distances. The intensity and force of the rivers thus formed would
depend upon two factors, first the extent of the watershed, and
secondly, the height of the mountains from which the water was derived.
The result of increasing cold was that in course of time the northern
hemisphere was surmounted by a cap of ice, of immense thickness (about
6000 ft.) in the Scandinavian area and gradually becoming thinner
towards the south, but at no time does it seem to have extended quite to
the south of England. This is proved by the absence of boulder-clay
(glacial mud) in the districts south of London. These arctic conditions
were not, however, continuous, but alternated with periods of a much
less rigorous temperature during what has been called the Ice Age.
Remains both of mammals and plants have been found, under conditions
that are held to prove this alternation.

Such being the natural forces at work remodelling the surface of the
earth; forces of such gigantic power as to be almost inconceivable in
these more placid times, it can easily be understood how, in the course
of the many thousands of years before the Quaternary period, when the
surface of the globe attained its present aspect, the powerful
river-systems of Europe wore their beds deep into the solid rocks. In
some cases in Europe the erosive power of the river has worn through its
bed to such an extent that the present stream is some hundreds of feet
lower than its forerunner in palaeolithic times. From various causes,
however, the rivers did not always wear for themselves a deep channel,
but spread themselves over a wide area. This seems to have been the case
with the Thames near London: the river-bed is not of any great depth,
but at various periods it has occupied the space between Clapton on the
north-east and Clapham on the south-west. It must not be assumed that
the whole of this area of 7 m. or more was filled by the river at any
one time, but rather that during the course of the palaeolithic period
the river had its bed somewhere between these two limits. For instance,
it is probable that at one period the bank of the Thames was at a point
nearly midway between the northern and southern limits, where Gray's Inn
Road now stands. It was here that the earliest recorded palaeolithic
implement (now in the British Museum) was found towards the close of
the 17th century in association with mammoth bones. But it is safe to
say that the Thames was a very much wider and more imposing river in
palaeolithic times than it is now, when its average width at London is
under 300 yds. As, in the course of ages, it changed its bed and by
degrees lessened in size and volume, it would leave, on the terraces
formed on its banks, the deposits of brick-earth and gravel brought down
by the stream, and it is on these terraces that the relics of
palaeolithic man are found, sometimes in great quantities. It will be
obvious from the nature of the case that the highest terraces, and those
farthest apart, should contain the earliest implements; but it is by no
means easy in the present state of the land surface and with our present
knowledge, to place the remains in their relative sequence. More
accurate observation, and a better understanding of the conditions under
which these deposits were made, should solve many such problems. Much
light has been thrown upon many points by Worthington Smith, who has
excavated with great care two palaeolithic floors at Clapton and at
Caddington near Dunstable. The latter discovery was of quite exceptional
interest as confirming the geological evidence by that of archaeology.
In this case the original level at which palaeolithic man had worked was
clearly defined, and was prolific of dark-grey implements, which had
evidently been made on the spot, as Smith found that many of the flakes
could be replaced on the blocks or cores from which they had been struck
by palaeolithic man; there were also the flint hammers that had been
used in the operation. Above the floor was a layer of brick-earth, again
covered by contorted drift, in which also implements occurred, but of a
very different kind from those found below. In place of being sharp and
unabraded, and with the refuse flakes accompanying them, they were
rolled and disfigured, of an ochreous tint, and evidently had been
transported in the drift from a much higher level now no longer
existing, as the site where they occurred is the highest in the
vicinity, about 500-600 ft. above sea-level. Here then we have a clear
case of palaeolithic man being compelled to abandon his working place on
the lower level by the descent of the waters containing the products of
his own forerunners, probably then very remote. In this case the
sequence of the various strata may be considered certain, and the
remains thus accurately determined and correlated are naturally of
extreme value and importance. But even this does not enable us to
diagnose another discovery unless the internal evidence is equally clear
and conclusive. One point of importance that may be noted is that the
older abraded implements were mostly of the usual drift type, while the
more recent ones from the "floor" contained forms more highly developed
and elaborated, such as occur in the French caves. Explorations of this
kind, carefully conducted in a strictly scientific spirit by men of
training and intelligence, are the only means by which real progress
will be made in this puzzling branch of archaeology.

Although many problems yet remain to be solved in England, its small
area, and the relatively large number of workers, have together sufficed
to put the main facts of the earlier stages of man's existence on a
fairly satisfactory basis. In France, owing to the richness of the
results, a great number of trained and ardent workers have made equal,
if not better, progress. But unfortunately the real scientific spirit is
not invariably found. Not so long ago an apparently serious writer in a
well-known scientific magazine gave a detailed account of his studies in
primitive methods and explained at great length his attempts at the
manufacture of flint and stone implements. He found by the processes he
adopted that it was much more easy for him to produce a polished
implement than one merely flaked. From this fact he seriously argued
that a great mistake had been made in the relative ages of the neolithic
and palaeolithic periods, and that the former must necessarily be the
older of the two. The evidence of geological position and of the
mammalian remains accompanying the obviously older flints was entirely
disregarded, just as on the other hand it was forgotten that in regard
to neolithic remains the proofs were in every way in favour of a
relatively modern origin. Such attempts not only bring the serious study
of early man into disrepute, but tend to retard the progress of real
knowledge and are therefore to be deplored and when possible
discouraged.

  Cave Period.

Caves (q.v.) have been at all periods regarded as something uncanny and
mysterious, with perhaps a tinge of the supernatural. In classical times
they were associated with semi-divine beings, with oracles, and even
with the gods themselves, while half the legends of dwarfs and gnomes
that run through the folk-lore of medieval and modern Europe are
associated with caves. They have been used as shelters or habitations at
all times, and in examining them it is fully as necessary to sift the
evidence of age as it would be in dealing with the river-gravels. Their
exploration in the first instance may well have been due to chance, but
it is fairly certain that during the 16th century the search for the
horn of the unicorn as an antidote to disease, was responsible for the
opening up of a certain number. Among the finds were no doubt the fossil
bones of Quaternary animals to which mythical names and imaginary
properties were attached, and the popular belief in such amulets
naturally gave a great impetus to the search. It is, however, only a
little more than a century ago that these investigations took anything
like a scientific turn, and even then they had only a palaeontological
end in view. The idea that archaeology entered into the matter was not
at all realized for some years. The remains of many extinct or migrated
animals, such as the hyena, grizzly bear, reindeer and bison, were found
in quantities in the now famous cave at Gailenreuth in Franconia; and
later, William Buckland explored the equally well-known hyena-cave at
Kirkdale in Yorkshire, where he demonstrated that these animals had
lived on the spot, feeding on the mammoth, rhinoceros and other
creatures that had been their prey. The remains of man, however, had not
been found, nor were they even looked for. It was not until Kent's
cavern, near Torquay, was examined by the Rev. J. McEnery, that man was
clearly proved to have been contemporary with these extinct beasts. So
contrary was this contention to the ideas prevalent in the second
quarter of the 19th century, that the pioneer in this work had died (in
1841) before the immense importance of his discovery was admitted. To
Godwin Austen in the first place and to W. Pengelley in the second, with
the aid of the British Association, was due the vindication of McEnery's
veracity and accuracy.

Several circumstances conspire to give a special interest to Kent's
cavern, and not the least is the fact that the age and appearance of the
various strata indicate that it has been the home or the refuge of human
beings at all ages even up to medieval times, and perhaps from a period
even more remote than is the case elsewhere. In the black mould that
formed the uppermost layer were found fragments of medieval pottery, and
relatively in close proximity were ancient British and Roman remains as
well as relics of the earliest days of metallurgy, in the shape of
bronze fragments. The two thousand years or more that may have separated
the oldest from the most modern of these later products, is as nothing
in comparison with the immense intervals that lie between the earliest
of them and the infinitely more remote period when gigantic mammals
first inhabited the cave. Attempts have been made from time to time to
express in years what the interval must have been: but as the
computations have differed by hundreds of thousands of years, according
to the method adopted, it is scarcely wise to do more than speculate.
Beneath the black mould, containing what may be called the recent
remains, was a layer of stalagmite, some feet in thickness; and under
this at one place was a great quantity of charcoal, which has been with
good reason assumed to show the site of fireplaces. A quantity of
implements of palaeolithic type was found, but the main layer at this
level consisted of a reddish clay known as cave-earth, and in this
deposit were implements both of flint and horn, as well as bones of
extinct animals. The flint implements were mostly of the usual
river-drift type, but some were of types generally confined to
cave-deposits of this period; while the barbed harpoon heads, and more
especially a bone needle, were definitely of the cave class, so well
represented in the caves of Dordogne. Again, below the cave-earth was a
_breccia_ formed of limestone and sandstone pebbles cemented together by
a calcareous paste. In this also were found implements and bones of
bears.

The succession of strata indicated above may be taken as typical of the
caverns used by palaeolithic man, the breccia and stalagmite flooring
being in themselves proof of a very considerable age, while the
association in the former, or under the latter, of remains of human
handiwork, with bones of extinct animals, may be safely taken to show
contemporaneous existence.

Once the mind has fairly grasped the fact that man was living at so
remote a time, it is a simple and natural conclusion that he should have
provided himself with weapons and tools more or less rudely fashioned
from the stones he found ready to his hand. The analogy of the recently
extinct Tasmanian is sufficient to show that even the meanest savage is
not without such aids. But the caves of France, of the same palaeolithic
period, and used by men theoretically in the same stage of culture,
bring before us a race of artists of first-rate capacity, who for
accuracy of observation, and for skill in indicating the character and
peculiarities of the animals around them, have never been surpassed.
Such a statement sounds like a contradiction in terms. We are dealing
with human beings whose intellect, to judge by their physical
characters, should be on a level with that of the Fuegian or the
Australian black, and far below that of the Maori or the Sandwich
Islander. Yet none of these gentle and relatively cultured brown races
produced anything in the nature of art that can in any sense be compared
with the masterly drawings or sculptures of the cave-men of France. The
best-known of the engravings, that of the mammoth on a piece of ivory,
is in the Jardin des Plantes in Paris. It is evidently intended to be
nothing more than a sketch, the lines of the finely curved tusks being
repeated several times in the desire for accuracy. But the heavy
lumbering walk of the ponderous beast, his attitude, and even the
character of the hairy hide, are all shown or suggested with a skill and
freedom that not only denotes daily familiarity with the thing
represented, but a most complete mastery of the art of translating the
idea into simple line. This mammoth-drawing is probably the most
important and monumental of its class, but there are many others that
possess artistic qualities not less remarkable, while they have in
addition a grace and beauty of line not less astonishing. One of these,
in the British Museum, the head of an ibex-like creature, is outlined
with a decision and refinement that can scarcely be surpassed, and many
other sketches in horn or stone in the same collection show a keen
appreciation of the characteristic features of the different animals as
well as a masterly deftness in the handling of the graving-tool. If we
are forced to marvel at the graphic skill of the cave-men, their
sculptures in the round are on a still higher plane, as may be seen in
the figures of reindeer in ivory in the British Museum. While they are
not highly finished, they show a complete understanding of the animal's
peculiar forms and contours, which are rendered in a direct,
unhesitating way that should betoken a long period of artistic training
and an executive power uncommon at any time. These drawings and
sculptures have always been appreciated and even regarded as being of a
much more advanced style than was to be expected among men who are
always classed in the lower grades of culture. But enough stress has not
hitherto been laid on the artistic quality of the work, which would be
considered fine at any time in the world's history. This high artistic
level was attained by a race of men whom we cannot credit with any great
intellectual equipment; men, moreover, who were engaged in a daily
struggle for the barest necessaries of life, in a trying climate and
surrounded by a fauna whose means of attack and defence were infinitely
superior to their own. There are many astonishing problems in
archaeology, but none so badly in need of solution. Had the discovery
been confined to a single drawing or even to a single site, fraud or a
misreading of the conditions might have been alleged, but the case is
very different. The drawings and sculptures have been found generally
enough in France to demonstrate that such artistic power was fairly
common, while the question of the authenticity and period of the
discoveries has long since been satisfactorily settled. It is true that
the climatic conditions in pleistocene France were more favourable to
man than was the case farther north, but even an agreeable climate does
not necessarily produce an artistic race; if it were so, the Polynesians
would probably be the greatest artists the world has ever seen. The
physical remains of palaeolithic man, even when found under
unquestionable conditions, are, however, so scanty, that it is unlikely
that the important question of the race or races inhabiting central and
northern Europe will ever be settled by their means. The evidence at
present is in favour of two very different types, one dwarfish and
brutal (Canstadt), the other more advanced and noble in physical
character (Cro-Magnon). To the latter were due the artistic productions,
and until further physical evidence is forthcoming recourse must be had
to the most minute examination of the objects themselves and to accurate
observation of the conditions under which they are found. So far as our
present materials go, these are the only means by which more light may
be thrown on the many problems of early man.

In spite of the unquestioned and unquestionable character of
palaeolithic discoveries in general, it must not be assumed that there
has been an absence of falsification, forgery, and what the French call
"mystification"; on the contrary, such attempts to meet the demand have
been common enough. Apart from Edward Simpson, who was notorious as
"Flint Jack" in the middle of the 19th century, many others, both in
England and on the continent of Europe, have devoted themselves to this
peculiar industry. Boucher de Perthes tried to conquer the scepticism of
some of his friends who doubted the human origin of the Abbeville
flints, by unwisely offering his workmen a reward for the discovery of
human bones in the same beds. The Moulin Quignon jaw was accordingly
produced, and became the subject of much controversy; but the evidence
finally showed that it had originally come from elsewhere. The cave
drawings also have found their imitators in modern times. One Meillet, a
man of education, took a special pleasure in the production of spurious
examples, and even published an account of his pretended discoveries.
But here, as in all the attempts at imitation of the cave drawings, the
modern efforts were betrayed by their poor artistic quality, and a
comparison of the new discoveries with the old was generally enough to
disclose the forgery. Two drawings on bone of a wolf and a bear,
declared to have been found in a cave at Thayingen in Switzerland, were
afterwards shown to have been copied from a child's picture-book. In
Switzerland also a brisk trade was carried on some years ago in false
antiquities said to come from the Lake-dwellings; and fantastic types of
tools and implements were placed on the market. In Italy, too, a lively
discussion has taken place of late years over the authenticity of
curiously shaped flint implements from the neighbourhood of Verona;
while America has provided similar food for discussion in the well-known
Lenapé stone and the Calaveras skull. The former bears drawings of the
French cave type, while the latter if genuine would carry back the story
of man in the American continent before Pliocene times.

  Mesolithic.

An apparent break in the continuity of man's history in Europe occurs at
the end of the palaeolithic period. Attempts have been made to bridge
the gap by means of a "mesolithic" period ([Greek: mesos], middle); but
it would not seem probable that the missing links will occur at all
events so far north as Britain. We leave palaeolithic man in a cold
climate, surrounded by a somewhat mixed fauna that formed his prey. We
know him as a hunter and artist, but the remains show that he had no
knowledge of pottery till towards the close of the period. Among the
humbler arts he practised at least sewing, and lived in caves or took
shelter at the base of overhanging rocks; but like the Australian, he
frequently camped in the open. His successor of the later Stone Age
(neolithic) we find to be a very different character and with very
different surroundings. The configuration of the land in which he lived
is practically the same as we now see it. The severe arctic conditions
with the appropriate fauna had entirely disappeared, and the
introduction of new arts must have radically changed his daily life. The
most important of these are the training of domestic animals,
agriculture, and the development of pottery. What were the burial rites
of palaeolithic man we have at present no means of knowing, but for his
neolithic successor we know that these were matters of great moment. The
abundance of arrowheads of flint indicate the common use of the bow and
arrow as a weapon, while the art of weaving marks an immense stride in
the direction of comfort and civilization. Of the form and construction
of his dwelling we have only a limited knowledge, derived with some
uncertainty from the analogy of the dwellings for the dead (barrows) and
more certainly from the remains of the villages found erected on piles
on the shores of lakes.

A much-debated question arises here that cannot be passed over. The
changes just mentioned are not such as would be produced by internal
causes alone. Much of the evidence is in favour of neolithic man being
an immigrant, coming into northern and central Europe long after
palaeolithic man and his characteristic fauna had disappeared. Where did
the earlier race go and who are its modern representatives, if any? The
answers to this question are many. W. Boyd Dawkins is of opinion that
the reindeer was followed by man in its journey to the north after the
retreating glaciers, and that the modern representative of palaeolithic
man is the Eskimo. His arguments are ingenious but unconvincing; they
mainly consist in the similarity of the habits of both races in using
harpoons and implements of similar form and make, their power of carving
and drawing on bone, the absence of pottery, disregard of the dead, &c.
As to the positive evidence, it is almost enough to say that the Eskimo,
like the cave-men, used the material nearest to hand that served their
purpose, and that nothing is more remarkable than the similarity of
primitive weapons used by widely separated peoples; while the negative
evidence as to the absence of pottery is of little value; their
conditions of life would allow them neither to make it nor keep it. Till
recently we had no evidence at all of the treatment of the dead by
palaeolithic man, but this is no longer the case; the discoveries in the
Grottes de Grimaldi, Monaco, show several methods of burial, near a
hearth, or in rude stone cists (see Dr Verneau in _L'Anthropologie_,
xvii. 291). A stronger argument would be furnished if it could be shown
that by his physical character the Eskimo is an intruder in his present
home, and is unrelated to his neighbours. But this has not yet been
done, and the skulls of the Eskimo do not resemble any of those hitherto
found in the caves. In fact, what evidence there is on the subject is
rather against than in favour of the wanderings northward of the
inhabitants of the caves. There are indications, on the other hand, that
in the south of France, in the Pyrenees, the reindeer was in existence,
with man, at a later period than that of the caves, while the type of
skull is that of Cro-Magnon. Here, therefore, it may be that something
like a bridging of the gap between palaeolithic and neolithic times may
be forthcoming. But it still remains to be found, and for the present we
must be content with uncertainty.

  Neolithic.

The neolithic period has often been loosely called the age of polished
stone, from the fact that in no case has a polished or ground stone
implement been found in a palaeolithic deposit. The term is not only
loose but inaccurate. In the first place, there is no reason why the
cave-men should not be found to have polished a stone implement on
occasion, for they habitually polished their weapons of bone. Secondly,
neolithic man was by no means uniform in his methods; he polished or
ground the surfaces of such tools or weapons as would be improved by the
process; but to take a common instance, he found that the efficacy of
his arrow-point was sufficient when chipped only, and polishing is only
occasionally found, as in Ireland. Many other implements also are found
in neolithic times with no trace of grinding and yet with every
appearance of being complete.

The most trustworthy evidence with regard to this and the succeeding
archaeological periods is to be found in the grave-mounds. For the
earlier part of the neolithic age, however, these are by no means
fruitful of relics. From their shape they are called in England "long
barrows" to distinguish them from the round barrows which belong to a
succeeding time, though evidence is being accumulated to show that this
division is not of universal application. Long barrows are by no means
of such frequent occurrence in Britain as the round variety; they are
most common in Wiltshire, Gloucestershire and Dorset, and occur as far
north as Caithness. Some of them contain within the mound a stone
chamber, at times with a gallery leading to it, and in the chamber the
interment or interments took place. Similar barrows have been found on
the continent of Europe, and both in Britain and abroad have one feature
in common, viz. that no metal, with possibly the exception of gold, has
ever been found in them. This similarity of burial custom, though it may
conceivably indicate intercourse, certainly does not prove identity of
race, as has been sometimes claimed. The type of skulls found in the
interment is clear evidence against such an assumption.

In Britain, the burials were at times by inhumation only, and
occasionally a great number of bodies were interred in the same barrow:
at others, cremation had preceded burial. Another remarkable feature is
that in many instances it is certain from the relative position of the
bones of the unburnt burials that the corpse had been allowed to decay
before the burial took place. This curious practice is known among many
savage tribes of the present day. Its occurrence in Britain has been
adduced in favour of the prevalence of cannibalism at this time, and not
altogether without reason. While metal is entirely absent in the long
barrows (and in fact relics of any kind are very rarely found), it is
significant that in the succeeding round barrows also metal occurs but
seldom, and then always of the types attributed to the earliest part of
the Bronze Age. When, therefore, the mound pottery is of a class that
may well be anterior to metal, and no metal is found with the burial, it
is not unreasonable to assign such barrows to the Stone Age. A similar
argument may be applied to the stone implements, but in the opposite
direction. Many stone implements are found either isolated, or perhaps
with no other relics that serve to fix their period. The material alone
is often considered sufficient evidence of their being before the age of
metals; but it is at any rate quite certain that a large number of stone
axes, more particularly those with a socket for the handle, belong
really to the Bronze Age. This uncertainty makes any account of the
neolithic age difficult, unless the material is taken as the main basis.

Neolithic man, like his forerunners, still recognized that flint and
allied stones provided the best material for his cutting and piercing
implements, though he made use to a great extent of other hard stones
that came ready to his hand. The mining of flint was undertaken on a
large scale, and great care was taken to get down to the layer
containing the best quality. In Norfolk, at Grime's Graves, and in
Sussex, at Cissbury near Worthing, the flint shafts have been carefully
explored by William Greenwell, General Pitt-Rivers and others. The
system was to sink two shafts some little distance apart and deep enough
to reach the desired flint-bed, and the two shafts were then joined by a
gallery at the bottom. At Grime's Graves large numbers of deer's horns
were found, which had evidently been used as picks, as is proved by the
marks found in the chalk walls; and the horn had been trimmed for the
purpose. Cups of chalk were also found in the galleries and were
believed to have been used as lamps. At Cissbury great quantities of
unfinished and defective implements were found in the work, as well as
horn tools, as in Norfolk. At such factories the primitive appliances
correspond very closely with those in use among existing savages. The
pebble was used as a hammer or an anvil, and the more delicate flaking
was done by pressure with a piece of horn rather than by blows.
Naturally enough the number of completed implements found in these
factories is small; the finished tools would be bartered at once and
carried away from the factory. All the animal remains found in these
pits belong to present geological conditions, thus emphasizing what has
been stated above, that the absence of polished implements is no
evidence for great age. Many other factories have been found in Britain,
in Ireland and on the continent of Europe: at Grovehurst in Kent, at
Stourpaine near Blandford, at Whitepark Bay, county Antrim, and in
Belgium at Spiennes. Among the North American Indians the method would
seem to have been somewhat different. After journeying to the site of a
suitable quality of stone, they did not always complete the implements
on the spot, but made a number of oval chipped disks of good stone which
they carried away and worked up into the required implements at their
leisure. These disks bear a strong likeness to some of the ovate
implements from the Drift in Europe; in fact, but for the difference of
surface condition or patina, they would be identical.

[Illustration: PLATE I.

  PALAEOLITHIC PERIOD

  1. French Drift
  2. English Drift.
  3. French transition (Le Moustier).
  4. French Cave Period.
  5. English Cave Period.]

[Illustration: PLATE II.

  SCULPTURE AND ENGRAVINGS OF THE CAVE PERIOD. FROM DORDOGNE, FRANCE.]

[Illustration: PLATE III.

  WALL PAINTINGS OF THE CAVE PERIOD CAVERN OF ALTAMIRA, SANTANDER,
  SPAIN.

  OUTLINE OF WALL-PAINTINGS, ALTAMIRA, LENGTH ABOUT 45½ FT (_cf_
  PAINTING, Plate 1.)

  By permission, from _La Caverne d'Altamira_ by Cartaulhac and Breuil
  Monaco 1906.]

[Illustration: PLATE IV.

  NEOLITHIC PERIOD.

  1. Flint and stone implements, England.
  2. Flint arrow-heads, England.
  3. Arrow-heads, Ireland.
  4. Flint and stone implements, Denmark.
  5. Flint implements, France.
  6. Flint implements, Egypt.]

While the severe climatic conditions that preceded the neolithic age
restricted the presence of man to the more temperate parts of the globe,
it may be assumed that in neolithic times there was nothing to prevent
him from occupying the greater part of the earth's surface, short of the
neighbourhood of the two poles. Thus it may be expected that an age of
stone will be found, if looked for, in every part of the globe. So far
as our present knowledge goes, all is in favour of the use of stone
before metals, in all countries. The one material requires no special
treatment before being adapted to man's use, while the other demands
considerable knowledge, even if reasoning power have but little place in
the process. Thus the probabilities are here borne out by the facts. In
the extensive "kitchen-middens" of Japan are found great numbers of
chert implements mixed with pottery of a primitive type, recalling that
of European early Bronze Age barrows, while the succeeding periods of
metal are equally clear. Even in the Far East, therefore, the same
sequence is to be observed. In China, the conditions are more obscure.
The superstitious regard for ancestors has prevented the exploration of
ancient tombs in that country, and thus systematic search has been
impossible, while the precise details of the discovery of such relics as
have come to light are difficult to obtain. In spite of the assertion
that China had no Stone Age, it is surely more probable, in the absence
of exact knowledge, that she followed the normal course. Modern
territorial divisions, more especially if they are independent of the
natural physical conditions of the land, such as mountain ranges, great
rivers and the like, have but little value in considering the race
problems of remote ages. If, therefore, we find that, in the countries
bordering on what is now the Chinese empire, the ancient inhabitants
followed the same broad lines of culture that are evident elsewhere, it
is easy to believe that China too was normal in this respect. The
negroes and Bantu races of Africa also were thought to have passed
direct to the use of iron, perhaps owing to the existence on the Nile of
a civilization of great antiquity, which enabled them to pass over the
intervening stages. Inherently improbable, this is now known not to have
been the case. Stone implements, whether ground or merely chipped, have
been discovered on the Congo, and more recently on the Zambezi. It is
quite true that in both cases they are found in superficial deposits,
and may be of any age. But here again the probabilities are greatly in
favour of their having been in use before iron was known. While stone
tools, such as knives or arrow-heads, may possess qualities that render
them superior to bronze or copper, it is certain that once the working
of iron was understood, its superiority to stone would at once be
perceived, and the stone tools be discarded. There can be little doubt
that investigations in Central Africa will demonstrate that the same
course was followed there as elsewhere. In South Africa, in Egypt and in
Somaliland large quantities of stone implements have been discovered,
and of the great age of most of them there can be no doubt. Some from
the banks of the Nile have even been claimed as "eolithic"; but here, as
in Europe, We can only say that the case is not proven: General
Pitt-Rivers did good service in Egypt by discovering among the
stratified gravels near Thebes a number of rude flints bearing
unmistakeable signs of human workmanship, but he described them merely
as of "palaeolithic type," and deplored the absence of mammalian remains
in the gravels. At the same time he pointed out that the bulk of the
implements claimed as palaeolithic (and, it may be, correctly) are found
on the surface, and therefore cannot be dissociated from the surface
types; hence form alone cannot be trusted to determine age. Further, we
are by no means well informed as to the value of patination in flints
found on the surface in Egypt. The depth and intensity of the patination
would no doubt have a direct relation to the age of the implement, if
only it could be proved that all of them had been equally subjected to
the conditions that produced the discoloration. But this is clearly
impossible. Some implements may conceivably have been continuously on
the surface of the desert from the time they were made, and have been
acted upon by the sun and air for many thousands of years, while others,
though of equal age, may have been covered by sand or otherwise
protected for a large part of the intervening centuries. Patination,
therefore, like form, can only claim a conditional value. It is at the
best an uncertain indication of age, as great age may be possible
without it. Similarly, in Somaliland, the condition of the implements is
very curious, and in some respects puzzling, while their forms resemble
those from the Drift in Europe. But as to the climatic conditions we
know nothing, and it is therefore useless to speculate on the condition
of the stones; as to the geology we know next to nothing, and no
mammalian remains give us a helping hand, while the form alone is a
dangerous foundation for argument.

  Europe and America.

Investigations in the more remote parts of the world, though they may
occasionally produce some startling novelty in the history of mankind,
can scarcely be expected to furnish the same trustworthy continuous
story as is to be found in the European area. Here history provides us
with a fairly truthful account of what has happened for a period varying
from two to three thousand years, or in some places even longer, and we
are thus able to judge whether particular discoveries come into the
historical stage or not. In more primitive lands where history (if there
be any) partakes more of the character of mythical tradition, the task
of defining the period to which particular discoveries belong is
rendered much more difficult. In America, where history may be said to
have begun five hundred years ago, such a feat is of course impossible,
until a great deal of work on comparative lines has been accomplished.
The accounts of the civilization of Mexico and Peru at the time of the
Spanish conquest show a state of culture which in some respects must
have put the Spaniards to shame, while in others it was primitive in the
extreme. As regards internal communications, the working of gold and
copper, and the manufacture and decoration of pottery, these American
kingdoms were on a level with all but the most advanced nations; but of
history in the true sense of the word they have none. In spite of this,
it is by no means a hopeless task to disentangle the apparent confusion
of their archaeology. It is now fairly well known what were the races or
tribes that inhabited particular districts, and it is thus easy to make
a _corpus_ of the types adopted by the various peoples. This is the
first certain step in the application of archaeological method. By
degrees, as these types become familiar to the trained eye, it will not
be difficult to arrange them in a progressive series, from the earliest
in style to the latest. That this will be done by the archaeologists of
the American continent, even with the present scanty materials, there
can be little doubt. Numbers of young and enthusiastic workers have now
had a good training in exploration in historical lands, and will
usefully employ their experience on the antiquities of their own
country. But if once a key be found to the ancient Mexican inscriptions,
so plentifully scattered through the ancient monuments, it may be that
enlightenment will come even more suddenly and more surely. The one
problem that is of the greatest interest still awaits solution, viz.
whether there is any relation, in culture or more remotely in race,
between the inhabitants of ancient America and those of Europe or Asia.
One thing is certain, that if there be any connexion, it is of infinite
remoteness. But it is at any rate noteworthy that the same designs,
patterns and even games are found in ancient Mexico and in India or
China; and whether these resemblances arise from relations between the
peoples using them or from accident, is a problem well worth
investigation.

In countries like Scandinavia or Switzerland, the story of the early
ages is clear and comparatively free from complications. The one by its
remoteness was left to develop with but little help from the rest of
Europe up to historical times; the other, protected on so many sides by
its mountain ranges, seems to have enjoyed a peaceful existence during
the Stone and Bronze Ages. A community of fishermen and agriculturists,
they led a calm domestic life on the edges of their many lakes where
they constructed dwellings on piles with only a gangway to the shore, to
prevent the attacks of predatory animals. The practice of building
houses in lakes was a common one not only in Switzerland, but also in
Britain and in Ireland, as in modern times among the natives of New
Guinea. Besides securing the safety of the inhabitants, it had the not
unimportant advantage of being more healthy; all refuse of food and
other useless matter could at once be thrown into the water where it
would be harmless. A similar form of dwelling is the Irish "crannog,"
constructed on an island or shoal in a lake, in some cases artificially
heightened so as to bring it above water. These crannogs were probably
inhabited in Ireland up to comparatively recent times, if one may judge
by the remains found on the sites.

It must not be forgotten that although the neolithic period had many
phases, yet its duration is in no way comparable to the incalculable
length of the palaeolithic age. For a variety of reasons it is thought
that one of the earliest stages of neolithic times is represented by the
now well-known kitchen-middens (refuse-heaps) of Denmark. These heaps
are often of great size, sometimes reaching 10 ft. in height, and nearly
350 yds. in length. Here along the coast line the natives of Denmark
lived, apparently building their huts upon the mounds and cooking their
food upon hearths of stone. The conditions of their daily life would
seem to have resembled those of the natives of Tierra del Fuego. Their
implements of flint seem to have been chipped only, and it is
conjectured that the few polished and more highly finished implements
that have been found in the middens are importations from more cultured
tribes living inland. Their food was in very great part composed of
shell-fish, though they evidently caught and ate various kinds of deer,
boar and a variety of carnivorous animals. The race which made these
mounds is believed to have been akin to the Lapps, and their dwellings
can hardly have been anything more than the rudest protection from the
weather. The Swiss lake-dwellers were far more advanced, even in the
Stone Age; their dwellings were elaborately planned and constructed, and
remains of them have been plentifully found in the various Swiss lakes.
Various forms of construction were adopted: in one the foundations
consisted of poles driven into the bed of the lake; in others a kind of
framework simply rested on the bottom, and in a third, the substructure
was formed of layers of sticks reaching from the bottom of the lake up
to the surface. The walls were of wattle, closed up with clay to keep
out the weather; the hearths were of stone slabs, and the floors of clay
well trodden down. Practically the same type of dwelling seems to have
continued through the Stone and Bronze Ages, though on some sites no
metal whatever is found and it is therefore assumed that these are of
the earlier period. These people cultivated the land, growing wheat and
barley; they were also hunters and fishermen, capable of manufacturing
pottery without the aid of the wheel, which had not yet come into use so
far north; and they wove mats and garments, while ropes and netting are
plentiful. Their tools and weapons were made of stone, and to a great
extent of deer's horn. Human remains are hardly ever found on the sites
of the lake-dwellings, and it is therefore uncertain what were the
social affinities of the people; but the evidence of the sites is in
favour of the same race being continuous into the Bronze Age, when their
condition was more comfortable, as is shown by the abundant remains of
domesticated animals.

  Stone Age relics.

Among the most notable and obvious relics of prehistoric times, both in
Britain and in many other countries such as Spain, Portugal, France and
even India, are gigantic circles and avenues of stone and dolmens (see
STONE MONUMENTS). These enduring monuments have excited the wonder of
countless generations, and lent themselves to superstitious practices
down to modern times. But the precise purpose for which they were
erected and even the period to which they belonged, had never been
definitely settled. They had been called burial places of great chiefs,
and not unnaturally had been thought by others to have been temples or
places of primitive worship used by the Druids, who moreover were often
credited with their erection. Obviously such a question called for
settlement, and the British Association in the year 1898 appointed a
committee to investigate these stone circles with a view to ascertaining
their age. Operations were begun at the well-known circle of Arbor Low,
south of Buxton in Derbyshire; careful excavations were made through the
ditch and the encircling mound and also within the circle, and although
the evidence was not of the most complete kind, yet the committee came
to the conclusion that the circle belonged to the end of the neolithic
age. At Arbor Low all the stones are now lying on the ground (although,
to judge from the other circles in England, they were certainly once
upright), and the opportunities for surveying were thereby much
diminished. It is a fortunate circumstance, therefore, that the fall of
one of the stones at Stonehenge (q.v.) at the end of the 19th century,
and the increasingly perilous state of some of the others, caused the
owner, with the advice of the Society of Antiquaries of London, to
undertake the raising of the great leaning stone in the interior of the
circle. The work was superintended by W. Gowland, F.S.A., who made
special investigations during the necessary digging, for the purpose of
recovering any remains of man's handiwork that had been left by the
builders of the monument. In this he was very successful, finding in the
course of the very limited excavation at the base of the monolith, a
great number of stone mauls or hammers that corresponded so nearly with
the bruised surfaces of the monoliths, that there can be no doubt of
their having been used to dress the standing stones.

From a review of all the evidence of an archaeological nature that was
to be obtained, Gowland came to the conclusion that the construction of
Stonehenge belonged to the latter part of the neolithic age. No trace of
a metal implement occurred in any of the debris. This would of itself be
an interesting fact, but it became infinitely more interesting from
researches in quite another direction, which brought corroborative
evidence of a curious kind. For many years Sir Norman Lockyer and Prof.
Penrose were engaged in examining the orientation of temples in Egypt
and Greece, with a view to determining on what astronomical principle,
if any, the plans had been laid down. With a rectangular plan, and with
portions of the interior still well defined, they were able by elaborate
calculation to determine that the temples had been definitely planned
with relation to the rising or setting of the sun or of a particular
star. Having been successful in these investigations they proceeded to
apply the test to Stonehenge. The experiment was made on the longest day
in the year 1901. Owing to a gradual change in the obliquity of the
earth's orbit, the point of sunrise on corresponding days of each year
is not constant; and though the difference is hardly perceptible from
year to year, in the course of centuries it becomes great enough for use
as a measure of time. Enough remains of the monument to show the
direction of sunrise at the time that Stonehenge was erected, it being
always assumed that the coincidence of the main axis with the central
line of the Avenue was designed with reference to sunrise on the longest
day of the year. At the date of the experiment it was found that the sun
had shifted nearly two diameters in the interval, and this variation
gives a date of about 1680 B.C., which practically confirms the verdict
of archaeology and seems to prove, moreover, that Stonehenge was a
temple of the sun.

Stonehenge therefore may be taken as marking for Britain the close of
the neolithic period and heralding the dawn of a new era, in which the
inhabitants of the British Isles first acquired the art of working
metal.

  Bronze Age.

There is reason to believe that the transition from the use of stone to
that of bronze was not due to the peaceful advance of civilization, but
rather to the irruption of an Aryan race from the south-east of Europe
into the countries to the west and north. Of these people the Celts are
to some extent the representatives at a somewhat more recent period.
Here, however, we are dealing with terms the precise meaning of which is
not yet generally admitted, and which, moreover, have too intimate a
relation to the problems of philology to be fully discussed here (see
INDO-EUROPEAN). The term Aryan (q.v.) itself is not free from
objections. It was held by Max Müller to relate to a language and a
civilization that took its rise in Central Asia, while others now
contend that, although it is the mother language of the Sanskrit, Greek,
Latin, Teutonic and Celtic languages, it might equally well have
originated in Europe. However this may be, and even this brief statement
shows how wide a field the arguments would cover, there can be little
doubt that the Bronze Age Celts were of this stock, and that in course
of time they gradually spread their language and culture over a large
part of Europe. Whether or no the knowledge of bronze started from one
or more centres, it gradually spread from the south-east of Europe until
it reached Scandinavia; the dates being roughly in Crete, 3000 B.C.; in
Sicily, 2500 B.C.; in central France, 2000 B.C.; in Britain and in
Scandinavia 1800 B.C. The appearance of the Celts in Britain is
indicated by the presence of the round barrows. They were a fairly tall,
short-headed race, using cremation and also inhumation in their burials,
skilful in the manufacture of pottery and of the simpler forms of bronze
implements, and freely using bone, jet, and at times amber, while gold
was well known and evidently greatly esteemed. In the early centuries of
the Bronze Age, swords, spears and shields were apparently quite
unknown, the principal metallic products being flat axes, simple knives
or daggers, and small tools or ornaments. In the burial places the
bodies, if unburnt, are nearly always found in a crouching position, as
if in the attitude of sleep; if cremated, the burnt bones are generally
enshrined in an urn under the tumulus, the burial being sometimes in a
cist formed of large stones. The pottery vessels are remarkable in more
ways than one. In the first place they would seem to have been specially
made for the burial rites, for whenever domestic pottery has been found,
it is of quite a different character, unornamented and simple in
outline. It must be confessed, however, that this latter is by no means
common. The sepulchral vessels are at times highly decorated, and
sometimes of great size. They are invariably hand made, and though they
are by no means well fired they are never sun-dried, as is often said to
be the case. A common kind of decoration is produced by impressing
twisted cords in the damp clay, and this is believed with some reason to
have had its origin in the practice of winding cords round the unbaked
vessel to prevent distortion before or during the process of firing.
That operation would of course burn away the cord and leave only its
impression on the urn. Other forms of ornament are also used, incised
lines in rudely geometrical designs, impressions of the end of a stick,
and at times rows of hollows produced by the finger or thumb. The method
of the burial, beyond giving an insight into the art of the period, also
helps us to realize to some extent the ideas of primitive man. The
underlying reason for careful and ceremonial burial is not always
readily understood, apart from a knowledge of the ritual, such as
existed in ancient Egypt. But in the Bronze Age in Britain it was the
custom to bury with the dead not only carefully made vessels which
doubtless contained food for the journey to the lower world, but also
the ornaments and weapons of the deceased. Often the bonea of a pig have
been found in the grave, doubtless representing part of the provender
which could not conveniently be placed in the so-called food-vessel.
Such practices indicate with a fair amount of certainty a belief in a
future life in another world, where probably the conditions were thought
to be much the same as in this. The burial of the weapons and other
property of a dead man is, however, not always due to the belief that he
may need them in some future state. The reason may well be that it would
be thought unlucky for a survivor to use them.

Just as the neolithic age was immeasurably shorter than the
palaeolithic, but was notable for great improvements in the arts of
life, so the Bronze Age in its turn was shorter than the neolithic age,
and again witnessed even more marked advance in culture. It is in fact
an illustration of the truism that each step in knowledge renders all
that follow less laborious; but it is not easy to understand how the
transition from stone to metal came about, nor why bronze came to be the
chosen metal rather than iron. Bronze, in the first place, is a
composite metal, a mixture of copper and tin, while iron can be at once
reduced from its ores; indeed, in the form of meteoric iron, it is
already metallic, and needs but a hammer to produce whatever form may be
wanted. From the archaeological point of view, there is, however, good
reason for believing that bronze preceded iron. The forms of axes that
are without doubt the earliest, are in outline much the same as the
stone prototype, being only thinner in proportion. Then again, iron
implements are never found on the earlier sites, and if they had been in
existence some of them certainly would remain: further, at the end of
the Bronze Age it is found that the forms of weapons in that metal are
exactly copied in iron, as, for instance, at Hallstatt (q.v.) in the
Salzkammergut, the famous cemetery which best illustrates the passage
from the use of bronze to that of iron. It has been claimed that bronze
was preceded by copper, a sequence which seems inherently probable; and
whether or no it was general enough or enduring enough to constitute a
period, there can be no reasonable doubt that in the Mediterranean area,
and in central Europe, as well as in Ireland, great numbers of
implements were made of copper alone without any appreciable admixture
of tin. The casting of pure copper presents certain difficulties, in
that the metal is not adapted for anything but a mould open to the air,
and this would limit its utility, until the discovery that tin in a
certain proportion (roughly 1:9) not only made the resulting metal much
harder and better fitted for cutting-tools and weapons, but at the same
time rendered possible the use of closed moulds.

There are thus two problems in connexion with the history of the Bronze
Age. How was the metal discovered? And by whom or where? As to the
first, it must be remembered that in some parts of the world, e.g. in
China and in Cornwall, copper and tin are found together, and it may
well be that tin was first accidentally included as an impurity, which,
had it been noticed, would have been eliminated. Once it was found to
produce a more useful metal, the blend would be deliberately made, and
repeated trials would eventually demonstrate the most suitable
proportion of one metal to the other. The question of where it was first
discovered is one that is not likely to be answered with certainty, but
the one essential is the presence of the two metals in one and the same
locality. Tin does not exist in either Egypt or Mesopotamia, although
bronze articles from the fourth and third millennium respectively B.C.
have been found in these countries. The tin to produce the mere metal
must have come from some foreign country; and the choice seems to be
very small. Spain at the other end of the Mediterranean is unlikely, and
Britain still more so; central Asia, Asia Minor, or China again seem too
remote; for the spread of metallurgy from these centres would imply a
trade connexion nearly 4000 B.C. In later times, later perhaps by 3000
years, Spain and Britain were undoubtedly among the chief sources of the
tin supply of Europe and of the Mediterranean generally; but it will
long remain a problem where bronze was first produced. There is indeed,
no real necessity for confining its origin to a single locality; it is
easily conceivable that the invention occurred independently in more
places than one.

The history of early metallurgy has been carefully studied by W.
Gowland, who communicated the results of his researches to the Society
of Antiquaries of London in 1899. In his opinion the ores from which
copper was first obtained by smelting were originally found as pebbles
or boulders in the beds of streams, where man in the Stone Age had been
accustomed to search for stones to convert into implements; and in the
same way the beds of rivers were for a long subsequent period the only
sources of tin. Actual mining belongs in his opinion to a far later
period, and naturally had its origin in the discovery of outcrops of the
metal on the surface. By the simple application of fire, lumps of ore
were reduced to a smaller size, and were then prepared for smelting by
further reduction to the condition of a coarse powder. This latter
process was carried out in the same way that grain was crushed between
two stones; and stone-mills, doubtless used for the purpose, have been
found in ancient workings in Wales. The next stage would be the furnace,
and there can be little doubt that this would be of the simplest kind,
merely a hole in the ground with the fire covering the metal, and with
nothing but a natural draught. But Gowland holds that even with these
singularly inadequate appliances, copper could be smelted from the
surface ores, though the output would naturally be of the most uncertain
and intermittent character, depending, as it must have done, on the
wind. And until the discovery of bellows or some other method of
increasing the draught of air, no progress could be made in this
direction. With regard to the resulting metal, viz. copper, we have
certain knowledge. From time to time there are found in the earth in
Britain and elsewhere, hoards of fragmentary or imperfect bronze
implements, portions of axes, swords, rings, &c., all of which have been
failures in castings. These hoards are assumed to have been gathered
together by the bronze founders to be recast into perfect and useful
implements. Now, frequently associated with these hoards are portions of
cakes of pure copper, originally circular in shape, flat on one face and
convex on the other, like a lens with one flat face. The form of these
cakes is in itself a fair proof of the prevalence of the method of
smelting described above, as it is quite clear that the convex face of
the cake followed the contour of the hole in the ground above which the
fire was placed. The cakes are generally found broken up into small
handy blocks. This can only be done in one way, viz. by watching the
cake, after the fire and slag has been raked off it, until it is on the
point of becoming solid, when it is quickly pulled out of the hole and
broken up. It will be noted that while the implements in these founders'
hoards are invariably of bronze, the cakes are as invariably of copper.
This is at first sight puzzling, until it is realized that these
founders probably carried the tin necessary for forming bronze in the
form of ore, and that tin ore in its pure state is a snuff-coloured
powder very easily overlooked when lying on the earth, which it might
very nearly resemble in colour, though it would be much heavier. Thus it
is probable that in many such discoveries the tin ore has accompanied
the copper cakes and bronze fragments, but has hitherto eluded the eyes
of the finder. Not only have we this conclusive evidence of the methods
by which Bronze Age man produced his raw material, but the discovery of
crucibles and moulds takes us a step further towards the finished
implements. The crucibles are generally simple bowls of thick clay with
an extension of the lip at one side to pour out the molten metal.
Several of these, with plentiful traces of metal still remaining in
them, were found by the brothers Siret in the Bronze Age settlement at
El Argar in Murcia. In the same place also were found moulds of stone
for the casting of simple triangular axes. These were of the class known
as open moulds, one stone being hollowed to the desired form, the other
half being simply a flat cover, with no relation to the form of the
implement to be produced. From the nature of the metal, such a mould is
the only kind in which the casting of an efficient copper implement
would be possible; and among the objects discovered by the Sirets were
articles in plenty of pure copper.

Much has been written in support of the theory that the bronze tools and
implements found in this or that country must have been importations
from southern and more highly civilized lands. More particularly has
this been alleged with regard to Britain, which, lying as it did on the
extreme limit of the ancient world, was regarded as being dependent on
the continent for the more complex weapons. The constant discovery,
however, of these hoards of rough metal, as well as of moulds of the
highest finish for casting swords, daggers, celts, and almost every kind
of ancient bronze implement and weapon known to us, provides a
conclusive proof of the contrary. The occurrence of a foreign type of
implement is so rare as to be a source of especial gratification to the
collector who secures it; and it may be taken that, in general terms,
all the bronze swords, daggers and spears found in Britain were of home
manufacture. Relations with the continent, however, did exist, as is
shown by the occurrence of an Irish type of gold ornament in France and
Scandinavia, and by the similarity of ornamental motives in the British
Isles and elsewhere. Among the continental races it is natural to find
intercommunication more common, owing to the absence of natural
barriers. The weapons of the Bronze Age were swords, spears, daggers and
axes (celts), though the last would be equally well adapted for more
peaceful purposes. The swords were usually of a narrow leaf shape, cast
with the handle in one piece, the mounting of the grip and the pommel
being added. For perfection of workmanship the weapons of this period
have never been surpassed, and the skill of adjustment in the moulds,
the fine and equal quality of the metal, and the flawless condition of
the surfaces still excite wonder among the most expert of modern
founders. The cutting edges of swords and "celts" were often, if not
always, hammered to serve the double purpose of hardening that part of
the weapon and sharpening the edge. In the case of the axe-heads
(celts), this hammering had a distinct influence on the evolution of the
form of the implement. The earliest celts, whether of copper or bronze,
were in form, copies of their stone prototypes, and curiously enough
exactly like the ordinary woodman's axe of to-day, but of course without
the socket for the handle. Hammering rendered the cutting edge both
broader and thinner, giving it at the same time a curved outline. This
widened curve eventually became an ornamental feature, the two ends of
the cutting edge becoming curved points and adding greatly to the
elegance of the outline. Later, the other edges were finished by
hammering also, at times in a simple ornamental fashion; and whether for
greater rigidity or for some other reason, flanges were produced in the
same way on those edges, which again affected the ultimate form of the
celt. The early flat celt was no doubt simply fixed in a perforated
wooden handle, which would naturally tend to split if wielded with any
vigour. The side-flanges were in course of time utilized to prevent
this, by allowing the use of a different form of handle. In place of the
simple straight handle, a branch was cut with an elbow-joint, and its
shorter limb then divided into two prongs, between which the metal
passed, while the flanges, beaten up from the edges, overlapped the two
forks; and no doubt a lashing of sinew was added to render the whole
secure. This made a good serviceable tool or weapon, and prevented the
splitting of the handle; but still another step was taken. The flanges
on the edges met over the prong of the handle on either side, while the
upper end of the celt itself eventually became a mere septum dividing
the two openings. This septum was finally judged to be useless, and done
away with; and the celt was cast with one hollow only for the reception
of the ends of the handle; thus the flat celt became, by a natural
process of evolution and improvement, a socketed celt. It is a curious
fact, however, that the modern form of axe where the handle passes
through a socket in the metal itself does not seem to have been much in
favour in the Bronze Age, although it was a stone form that certainly
survived into the succeeding period.

This and other shortcomings in what must have been the universal weapon
and implement of the race, were remedied from time to time by various
improvements in the form of the bronze axe-head and the method of
hafting; and the various stages of development, from the flat blade of
copper or bronze to the socketed implement and even to a pattern now in
use, can still be traced in the Bronze Age specimens that have come down
to us.

[Illustration: PLATE V.

  SEPULCHRAL POTTERY, BRITISH ISLES (BRONZE AGE).

  1-3, Drinking cups or beakers. 4-9, Food vessels. 10-12, Cinerary
  urns.

  SEPULCHRAL POTTERY FROM THE CONTINENT OF EUROPE (NEOLITHIC, BRONZE,
  AND IRON AGES).

  STAGES IN THE EVOLUTION OF THE CELT OR IMPLEMENT OF CHISEL FORM.

  (1) From stone to metallic form.
  (2) Growth of the stop ridge to palstave.
  (3) Growth of the wings to socket-celt.

  By permission, from the British Museum _Guide to the Bronze Age._]

[Illustration: PLATE VI.

  1. Bronze shield with red enamel ornaments, found in the Thames near
  Battersea; about 31 in. long.

  Chariot burial of a Gaulish chief, Somme Bionne, Marne, France.

  Bronze mounted wooden bucket found in a pit burial at Aylesford.

  Early Iron Age.

  Horned bronze helmet with traces of enamel ornament, found in the
  Thames near Waterloo Bridge.

  The objects here represented are all in the British Museum.

  By permission, from the British Museum _Guide to the Early Iron Age._]

  Iron age.

With the discovery of iron as the ideal metal for cutting implements and
weapons, we enter into the millennium before the Christian era; for
roughly speaking, the development of the civilization associated with
the gradual substitution of iron for bronze began about 1000 B.C. Again
we look towards the south-east of Europe for the earliest evidence of
this great advance; from that quarter it gradually spread over the whole
continent, reaching the more northern parts about five hundred years
later. In Egypt, the home of a marvellous civilization at a very early
time, the conditions were different, and there is reason to suppose that
iron was known there long before it was in use on the northern side of
the Mediterranean. Our knowledge of the dates at which iron was first
known in parts of Asia is still very limited, and further discoveries
must be awaited.

  Ireland.

The archaeology of Ireland presents features in many respects different
from those of the rest of the British Islands in the Stone and Bronze
Ages. Such affinities in style as are traceable connect it rather with
Scotland than with any part of the south, a fact doubtless due to
proximity as well as in part to race connexions. A special feature is
the astonishing quantity of gold that was produced in Ireland during the
early Bronze Age. The frequent discovery of gold ornaments of this time
has enriched to a surprising degree the museum of the Royal Irish
Academy in Dublin, while many private and public collections both in
Ireland and elsewhere contain a considerable number of similar relics.
If these represented the total wealth of gold of the Bronze Age the
amount would probably exceed that of any ancient period in any country,
except perhaps the republic of Colombia in South America. But the known
remains can only be a small proportion of the original wealth. Vast
quantities must have been discovered from medieval times onwards, nearly
all of which would be melted down, owing to the ignorance of the finders
or to the uncertainty of ownership. Further, it may be taken as certain
that there still remains in the earth a great mass of the metal which
may or may not be discovered at some future time. If it were by any
means possible to estimate what these united categories would amount to,
the result would scarcely be credited. It is well known that gold has
been, and still is, found in Ireland; but it is hard to believe that
there were no richer deposits than are now known. It is at any rate
certain that the rivers were worked as late as the opening centuries of
our era. In the Bronze Age the most characteristic ornaments were
penannular objects of all sizes from a small finger ring up to an
armlet, generally known as "ring money" from the difficulty of assigning
a definite use to the whole series; and the flat, crescent-shaped,
diadem-like objects called "lunulae," which are perhaps even more
definitely characteristic of Ireland. Such objects of gold, if
ornamented at all, are, like some of the flat axe-heads, engraved with
simple geometrical patterns, lozenge-shaped chequers and the like, a
type of decoration in itself easily determined as being of the Bronze
Age, but bearing at the same time an interesting and very curious
analogy to remains of the same period from the Iberian Peninsula, more
especially from Portugal. If any overland culture-relations existed
between the two countries, it would be only reasonable to expect the
occurrence of the objects in question in the intervening districts. But
so far nothing of the kind has been discovered. Moreover, had it been an
isolated instance of resemblance it might be negligible, but an equally
odd similarity is found in the fact that the Irish were in the habit of
grinding the faces of their flint arrow-heads, an apparently useless
refinement, while the Portuguese of the early Bronze Age did the same.
Again, the dolmens of Ireland bear a distinct resemblance to those of
Spain and Portugal, while the French dolmens, with few exceptions in the
north, have a different character. These curious points are in favour of
the tradition that the original inhabitants of Ireland were of Iberian
origin, and further, that they did not come overland but by sea, and
there are indeed signs of extensive navigation in the Bronze Age of
northern Europe. It was perhaps in the middle of our Bronze Age, say
about 1000 B.C., that this Iberian race was supplanted by the Celts, who
took a considerable time to emerge from their native barbarism. It is,
at any rate, fairly certain that for some hundreds of years previous to
this Celtic invasion, Ireland was an enormously rich country, supplying
not only herself, but also Britain and part of the Atlantic seaboard
with gold. The fact became eventually an ingrained tradition in the
history of the country, subsisting in Irish literature for centuries
after the Christian era. Such natural wealth must have produced in these
early times a marked effect on the relations and culture of these
Iberian Irish, and one might reasonably expect a much higher level of
luxury and wealth than is indicated by the remains commonly found. With
the opportunities provided by communication with the continent, and the
interchange of goods, with all the chances of benefiting by ideas
current among other races, it is astonishing that Ireland did not play a
more prominent part in Europe, more than a thousand years before the
Christian era.

  Mediterranean area.

While gold as a metal was known in Europe, even before copper, it is a
curious fact that silver was almost unknown, and hardly ever used. One
of the most interesting sites for the metal, at about the same period of
which we have just been speaking in Ireland, was the Mediterranean coast
of Spain. Here in the neighbourhood of Almeria have been found remains
of a large and apparently prosperous population ranging from the Stone
Age to the end of the Bronze Age, with houses and tombs, besides the
fortifications rendered necessary, in the later period, by their
possession of the rare and precious metal, silver. Rare it certainly
was, for the quantity found was exceedingly small, tiny slender rings
for the fingers or the ears, and rivets to hold the axe-blade in its
handle; but nothing to compare with the lavish richness of the American
mines. The interesting race who occupied these dwellings and finally
were laid to rest in the adjoining graves were evidently connected more
or less closely with the peoples inhabiting the eastern coasts of the
Mediterranean.

Recent discoveries in the central Mediterranean area not only furnish
new and trustworthy (though none the less surprising) dates in ancient
history, but may also bridge the distance between the Levant and the
Pillars of Hercules. The results achieved by Arthur Evans and other
distinguished explorers in Crete (q.v.) opened a new chapter in the
history of European civilization, and may fitly be compared with the
excavation of Troy, Mycenae and Tiryns by Schliemann some thirty years
before. The progress of archaeology in the interval can be well tested
by a comparison of the discussions to which the two series of
discoveries gave rise. The mistaken attributions and unfortunate
animosities in connexion with earlier excavations are almost forgotten,
while the brilliant discoveries in the island of King Minos have not
only themselves been made on scientific principles, but are illumined by
the splendid revelation of the civilizations of the Mycenaean and the
pre-Mycenaean era.

  Classical.

A great change indeed took place in the methods of classical study
during the last decade of the 19th century, a change which affected the
entire character of future classical research. It was formerly the
common habit among students and professors of archaeology to confine
their attention and their interests entirely to classical texts and even
to classical sites, rejecting as outside the scope of their studies
anything that was not manifestly beautiful as art. Whatever was
primitive in its aspect, or wanting in the familiar characteristics that
had for centuries been associated with Greek art, was either rejected
entirely or at any rate relegated to a second place, as having but a
poor claim to be classed with objects of the finer periods. The result
was necessarily misleading. The uninstructed majority very naturally
regarded the art of Pheidian times as a thing of supernatural growth,
which had been bestowed by divine favour upon a chosen spot on the
earth, without a human parentage, and almost without leaving any
descendants. The evolutionary methods of other branches of science,
however, were by degrees brought to bear upon the sacred precincts of
pure Greek art. It was found that the crude products of the second
millennium B.C., the formless images evolved by the uncultured dwellers
in the Mediterranean area more than a thousand years before the time of
Pheidias, were in truth the prototypes of the creations of himself and
his contemporaries. This step being taken, the rest became easy. The
most commonplace and ordinary relics were collected with as much avidity
as they had formerly been rejected, in the belief that their simple
forms would aid in the elucidation of their more complex and highly
elaborated descendants. This minute attention, moreover, was not only
given to the works of man, but even the remains of humanity received the
attention they merited. It has been rightly thought, during recent
years, that the question of race was a factor that deserved treatment in
dealing with works of art of early times; and that natural evolution due
to man's tendency to change with time, might not be sufficient to
account for the differences of type observed in human remains from the
same country. For this reason, not only the objects associated with the
burial have been preserved, but also the skeleton itself. This has been
examined, measurements taken and recorded for comparison, and inferences
made, sometimes of a surprising character. For example, if a cemetery be
found with a preponderance of tall, long-headed skeletons in a district
where the prevailing type of skeleton is short and brachycephalic
(short-headed), the observer may reasonably expect a different kind of
burial-furniture, and suspect an intruding race. In this particular
respect, archaeology owes a signal debt to physical anthropology and to
anthropological methods in general. The combination of the two is far
more likely to lead to a reasonable and satisfactory conclusion than
would be possible if the one branch of science had been pursued alone.

  Value of ethnology.

When once the existence of abundant remains of prehistoric man had been
admitted, and their study had received recognition as a branch of
science, the evidence supplied by the relics themselves and by their
relation to extinct or existing animals would have sufficed to give a
considerable insight into the conditions of primitive life. But,
fortunately, corroborative evidence of the most useful kind was at hand,
and has been of the greatest service in solving what might otherwise
have been insoluble problems. Though the progress of civilization, and
more especially the ever increasing rapidity of communication are
rapidly changing the habits of life among the primitive peoples in
various parts of the world, yet till past the middle of the 19th
century, a certain number of tribes, if not races, were still in the
Stone Age. Even at the present day stone-using tribes still exist,
although by chance metal may be known to them. The importance of the
study of their conditions of life and their technical processes, and of
the collecting of their implements for the express purpose of
illustrating prehistoric man, was recognized by Henry Christy
(1810-1865), who had made extensive investigations and collected relics
in conjunction with Edouard Lartet in the now famous caverns of the
Dordogne, at a time when such explorations were somewhat of a novelty;
and concurrently he formed a large collection of the productions of
existing savage peoples, both collections after his death passing to the
British Museum, his intention being that the one should elucidate the
ether. (It is only fair to his memory, however, to state here that, by
his express wish, the most important of the relics that he had obtained
from the Dordogne caves were returned to France where they now are. Such
instances of international courtesy are rare enough to deserve mention.)
The value and interest of such a series can scarcely be over-rated.
Almost till the 20th century, the Indians of North America, the
Australian and Tasmanian natives, as well as those of New Zealand and
the many archipelagoes of the Pacific, were, if not ignorant of the use
of metals, at least habitually using stone where civilized man would use
metal. The Maori made his war club of jade and the pounders for
preparing his food of stone. The Australian had his stone axe-blade; and
low as he stands in the culture scale, his spear-heads are chipped with
an exquisite precision. The Papuan of inland New Guinea is still making
his weapons of stone and wood; while until quite recently the North
American Indian was making his delicate stone arrow points, and the
Solomon islander his beautiful polished stone axe-blades. The knowledge
gained by the study of a large series of such objects enables us to fill
up very many gaps in the story of early man as told by his own remains.
In fact, in this respect, the value of the comparison is much greater
than could reasonably be expected; for, whatever may be the reason,
nothing is more marked than the extraordinary similarity of stone
implements at all times and over the whole world. An arrow-point made by
a Patagonian Indian, one from a Japanese shell mound, and a third of the
Stone Age from Ireland, are found to be practically identical. Whether
it is that the same material and the same necessity naturally produce a
like result, or whether there has existed throughout a continuity of
type, is a question that will never be satisfactorily answered. The
results, however, are of eminently practical value. The arrow-heads of
neolithic man, which are found by hundreds all over Europe, may be seen
fixed in their shafts in the hands of an American Indian; rude pieces of
quartz, which unmounted would escape notice as implements, are seen to
make excellent tools when mounted in a handle by the Australian black,
while flakes of slate find a use when mounted as skinning knives by the
Eskimo.

  Organized study.

Now that the narrower conception of archaeology as a minor branch of
classical studies has been given up, the new science has gradually won
its way to universal recognition; and anthropology, a still wider
subject but in many points closely allied to the scientific study of
ancient remains, has still more recently found favour at all the leading
universities, and practical measures have been taken to establish the
study on a firm and scientific basis. Apart from this official
encouragement, much has been done towards the systematization and
teaching of archaeology by practical excavators, whose pupils have
attained considerable numbers and celebrity. Something has been done,
too, in the national and provincial museums, to present the relics of
past ages in an intelligible manner, so that the collections no longer
consist of curiosities but of documents rich in instruction and interest
even to the general visitor. The progress of photography, as well as the
improvement and cheapening of methods of illustration, have also
assisted enormously in the advance of archaeology; and similarly, the
antiquities exhibited in museums and private collections to illustrate
and amplify written records, have in the last generation received much
attention on their own account, and have reacted in various ways on the
teaching of ancient history. In some countries a further step in general
education has been taken, and the lamentable waste of archaeological
material arrested to some extent by the distribution of pictures and
diagrams among schools and institutions, to call attention to the more
ordinary local types, and to encourage those who are likely to discover
them in the soil to save them from destruction and render them available
for scientific study. A certain familiarity on the part of the young
with the mere appearance of antiquities that come to light continually
and are almost as often discarded or destroyed, would probably result in
valuable additions being made to the available data.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The most useful general works are the
  following:--Salomon Reinach, _Epoque des alluvions et des cavernes_
  (Musée de St Germain); Hoernes, _Der diluviale Mensch in Europa;_ Sir
  John Evans, _Stone Implements of Great Britain_, and _Bronze
  Implements of Great Britain;_ Boyd Dawkins, _Cave-hunting_, and _Early
  Man in Britain;_ Greenwell, _British Barrows;_ W.G. Smith, _Man the
  Primeval Savage;_ James Geikie, _Prehistoric Europe;_ Mortillet, _Le
  Préhistorique;_ Robert Munro, _Lake Dwellings of Europe;_ Ridgeway,
  _Early Age of Greece;_ Jos. Anderson, _Scotland in Pagan Times;_ the
  works of Oscar Montelius and Sophus Müller; _L'Anthropologie,
  Matériaux pour l'histoire primitive de l'homme;_ Christy and Lartet,
  _Reliquiae Aquitanicae;_ A. Michaelis, _A Century of Archaeological
  Discovery_ (Eng. trans., 1908). See also ANTHROPOLOGY, and authorities
  mentioned there; STONE AGE; BRONZE AGE; IRON AGE, &c.; GEOLOGY; and
  the articles on different countries and sites.     (C. H. Rd.)