ARCOT, the name of a city and two districts of British India in the
presidency of Madras. Arcot city is the principal town in the district
of North Arcot. It occupies a very prominent place in the history of the
British conquest of India, but it has now lost its manufactures and
trade and preserves only a few mosques and tombs as traces of its former
grandeur. It is a station on the line of railway from Madras to Beypur,
but has ceased to be a military cantonment. The most famous episode in
its history is the capture and defence of Arcot by Clive. In the middle
of the 18th century, during the war between the rival claimants to the
throne of the Carnatic, Mahommed Ali and Chanda Sahib, the English
supported the claims of the former and the French those of the latter.
In order to divert the attention of Chanda Sahib and his French
auxiliaries from the siege of Trichinopoly, Clive suggested an attack
upon Arcot and offered to command the expedition. His offer was
accepted; but the only force which could be spared to him was 200
Europeans and 300 native troops to attack a fort garrisoned by 1100 men.
The place, however, was abandoned without a struggle and Clive took
possession of the fortress. The expedition produced the desired effect;
Chanda Sahib was obliged to detach a large force of 10,000 men to
recapture the city, and the pressure on the English garrison at
Trichinopoly was removed. Arcot was afterwards captured by the French;
but in 1760 was retaken by Colonel Coote after the battle of Wandiwash.
It was also taken by Hyder Ali when that invader ravaged the Carnatic in
1780, and held by him for some time. The town of Arcot, together with
the whole of the territory of the Carnatic, passed into the hands of the
British in 1801, upon the formal resignation of the government by the
nawab, Azim-ud-daula, who received a liberal pension.

The district of North Arcot is bounded on the N. by the districts of
Cuddapah and Nellore; on the E. by the district of Chingleput; on the S.
by the districts of South Arcot and Salem; and on the W. by the Mysore
territory. The area of North Arcot is 7386 sq. m., and the population in
1901 was 2,207,712, showing an increase of 4% in the decade. The aspect
of the country, in the eastern and southern parts, is flat and
uninteresting; but the western parts, where it runs along the foot of
the Eastern Ghats, as well as all the country northwards from Trivellam
to Tripali and the Karkambadi Pass, are mountainous, with an agreeable
diversity of scenery. The elevated platform in the west of the district
is comparatively cool, being 2000 ft. above the level of the sea, with a
mean maximum of the thermometer in the hottest weather of 88°. The hills
are composed principally of granite and syenite, and have little
vegetation. Patches of stunted jungle here and there diversify their
rugged and barren aspect; but they abound in minerals, especially copper
and iron ores. The narrow valleys between the hills are very fertile,
having a rich soil and an abundant water-supply even in the driest
seasons. The principal river in the district is the Palar, which rises
in Mysore, and flows through North Arcot from west to east past the
towns of Vellore and Arcot, into the neighbouring district of
Chingleput, eventually falling into the sea at Sadras. Although a
considerable stream in the rainy season, and often impassable, the bed
is dry or nearly so during the rest of the year. Other smaller rivers of
the district are the Paini, which passes near Chittore and falls into
the Palar, the Sonamukhi and the Chayaur. These streams are all dry
during the hot season, but in the rains they flow freely and replenish
the numerous tanks and irrigation channels. The administrative
headquarters are at Chittore, but the largest towns are Vellore (the
military station), Tirupati (a great religious centre), and Wallajapet
and Kalahasti (the two chief places of trade).

The district of South Arcot is bounded on the N. by the districts of
North Arcot and Chingleput; on the E. by the French territory of
Pondicherry and the Bay of Bengal; on the S. by the British districts of
Tanjore and Trichinopoly; and on the W. by the British district of
Salem. It contains an area of 5217 sq. m.; and its population in 1901
was 2,349,894, showing an increase of 9% in the decade. The aspect of
the district resembles that of other parts of the Coromandel coast. It
is low and sandy near the sea, and for the most part level till near the
western border, where ranges of hills form the boundary between this and
the neighbouring district of Salem. These ranges are in some parts about
5000 ft. high, with solitary hills scattered about the district. In the
western tracts, dense patches of jungle furnish covert to tigers,
leopards, bears and monkeys. The principal river is the Coleroon which
forms the southern boundary of the district, separating it from
Trichinopoly. This river is abundantly supplied with water during the
greater part of the year, and two irrigating channels distribute its
waters through the district. The other rivers are the Vellar, Pennar,
and Gadalum, all of which are used for irrigation purposes. Numerous
small irrigation channels lead off from them, by means of which a
considerable area of waste land has been brought under cultivation.
Under the East India Company, a commercial resident was stationed at
Cuddalore, and the Company's weavers were encouraged by many privileges.
The manufacture and export of native cloth have now been almost entirely
superseded by the introduction of European piece goods. The chief
seaport of the district of South Arcot is Cuddalore, close to the site
of Fort St David. The principal crops in both districts are rice,
millet, other food grains, oil-seeds and indigo.