ARCULF, a Gallican bishop and pilgrim-traveller, who visited the Levant
about 680, and was the earliest Christian traveller and observer of any
importance in the Nearer East after the rise of Islam. On his return he
was driven by contrary winds to Britain, and so came to Iona, where he
related his experiences to his host, the abbot Adamnan (679-704). This
narrative, as written out by Adamnan, was presented to Aldfrith the
Wise, last of the great Northumbrian kings, at York about 701, and came
to the knowledge of Bede, who inserted a brief summary of the same in
his _Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation_, and also drew up a
separate and longer digest which obtained great popularity throughout
the middle ages as a standard guide-book (the so-called _Libellus de
locis sanctis_) to the Holy Places of Syria. Arculf is the first to
mention the column at Jerusalem, which claimed to mark the exact centre
of the Inhabited Earth, and later became one of the favourite Palestine
wonders. Besides a valuable account of the principal sacred sites of
Judaea, Samaria and Galilee as they existed in the 7th century, he also
gives important information as to Alexandria and Constantinople, briefly
describes Damascus and Tyre, the Nile and the Lipari volcanoes, and
refers to the caliph Moawiya I. (A.D. 661-680), whom he pictures as
befriending Christians and rescuing the "sudarium" of Christ from the
Jews. Arculf's record is especially useful from its plans, drawn from
personal observation by the traveller himself, of the churches of the
Holy Sepulchre and of Mount Sion in Jerusalem, of the Ascension on
Olivet and of Jacob's well at Sichem. It is also a useful witness to the
prosperity and trade of Alexandria after the Moslem conquest: it tells
us how the Pharos was still lit up every night; and it gives us (from
Constantinople) the first form of the story of St George which ever
seems to have attracted notice in Britain.

  Thirteen MSS, of the original Arculf-Adamnan narrative exist, and
  fully 100 of Bede's abridgment: of the former, the most important,
  containing all the plans, are (1) Bern, Canton Library, 582, of 9th
  cent.; (2) Paris, National Library, Lat. 13,048, of 9th cent.; a
  third MS., London, B. Mus., Cotlon, Tib. D. V., of 8th-9th cents.,
  though damaged by fire and lacking the illustrations, is of value for
  the text, being the oldest of all. Among editions the first is of
  1619, by Gretser; the best, that of 1877, by Tobler, in _Itinera et
  Descriptiones Terrae Sanctae_; we may also mention that of 1870, by
  Delpit, in his _Essai sur les anciens pelerinages à Jérusalem_; see
  also Delpit's remarks upon Arculf in the same work, pp. 260-304;
  Beazley, _Dawn of Modern Geography_, i. 131-40 (1897).