ARDENNES, a district covering some portion of the ancient forest of
Ardenne, and extending over the Belgian province of Luxemburg, part of
the grand duchy, and the French department of Ardennes. Bruzen
Lamartinière states in his _Dictionnaire Géographique_ that the Gauls
and Bretons called it by a word signifying "the forest," which was
turned into Latin as _Arduenna silva_, and he thinks it quite probable
that the name was really derived from the Celtic word _ardu_ (dark,
obscure). The Arduenna Silva was the most extensive forest of Gaul, and
Caesar (_Bello Gallico_, lib. vi. cap. 29) describes it as extending
from the Rhine and the confines of the Treviri as far as the limits of
the Nervii. In book v. the Roman conqueror describes his campaign
against Indutiomarus and the Treviri in the Ardenne forest. Strabo gave
it still greater extent, treating it as covering the whole region from
the Rhine to the North Sea. It is safer to give it the more reasonable
dimensions of Caesar, and to accept the verdict of later commentators
that it never extended west of the Scheldt. At the division of the
empire of Charlemagne between the three sons of Louis the Débonnaire,
effected by the pact of Verdun in 843, the forest had become a district
and is called therein _pagus Arduensis_. It was part of the division
that fell to Lothair, and several of the charters of 843 expressly
specify certain towns as being situated in this _pagus_. In the 10th
century the district had become a _comitatus_, subject to the powerful
count of Verdun, who changed his style to that of count of Ardenne.

The Belgian Ardennes may be said now to extend from the Meuse above
Dinant on the west to the grand duchy of Luxemburg and Rhenish Prussia
as far north as the Baraque de Michel on the east, and from a line drawn
eastward from Dinant through Marche, Durbuy and Stavelot to the Hautes
Fagnes on the north, to the French frontier roughly marked by the Semois
valley in the south. Within these limits there are still some of the
finest woods in Europe, which seem to have come down to us almost intact
from the days of the Arduenna of Caesar. Notable among these portions of
the great forest are the woods of St Hubert, the woods round La Roche,
and those of the Amerois, Herbeumont, and Chiny on the Semois. In the
grand duchy the forest has almost entirely disappeared, but owing to the
compulsory law of replanting in Belgium this fate does not seem likely
to attend the Belgian Ardennes.

In addition to being a forest the Ardennes is a plateau, and it offers
to the geologist a most interesting field of investigation. The greater
part of the Ardennes is occupied by a large area of Devonian beds,
through which rise the Cambrian masses of Rocroi and Stavelot, and a few
others of smaller size. Upon the folded slates and schists which
constitute these inliers the Devonian rests with marked unconformity;
but north of the ridge of Condroz Ordovician and Silurian beds make
their appearance. Near Dinant carboniferous beds are infolded among the
Devonian. Along the northern margin lies the intensely folded belt which
constitutes the coalfield of Namur, and, beneath the overlying Mesozoic
beds, is continued to the Boulonnais, Dover and beyond. The southern
boundary of this belt is formed by a great thrust-plane, the _faille du
midi_, along which the Devonian beds of the south have been thrust over
the carboniferous beds of the coalfield.

The Ardennes are the holiday ground of the Belgian people, and much of
this region is still unknown except to the few persons who by a happy
chance have discovered its remoter and hitherto well-guarded charms.
There is still an immense quantity of wild game to be found in the
Ardennes, including red and roe deer, wild boar, &c. The shooting is
preserved either by the few great landed proprietors left in the
country, or by the communes, who let the right of shooting to
individuals. Occasionally it is still stated in the press that wolves
have been seen in the Ardennes, but this is a mere fiction. The last
wolf was destroyed there in the 18th century.