ARDEA, a town of the Rutuli in Latium, 3 m. from the S.W. coast, where
its harbour (_Castrum Inui_) lay, at the mouth of the stream now known
as Fosso dell' Incastro, and 23 m. S. of Rome by the Via Ardeatina. It
was founded, according to legend, either by a son of Odysseus and Circe,
or by Danae, the mother of Perseus. It was one of the oldest of the
coast cities of Latium, and a place of considerable importance;
according to tradition the Ardeatines and Zacynthians joined in the
foundation of Saguntum in Spain. It was the capital of Turnus, the
opponent of Aeneas. It was conquered by Tarquinius Superbus, and appears
as a Roman possession in the treaty with Carthage of 509 B.C., though it
was later one of the thirty cities of the Latin league. In 445 B.C. an
unfair decision by the Romans in a frontier dispute with Aricia led,
according to the Roman historians, to a rising; the town became a Latin
colony 442 B.C., and shortly afterwards it appears as the place of exile
of Camillus. It had the charge of the common shrine of Venus in
Lavinium. It was devastated by the Samnites, was one of the 12 Latin
colonies that refused in 209 B.C. to provide more soldiers, and was in
186 used as a state prison, like Alba and Setia. In imperial times the
unhealthiness of the place led to its rapid decline, though it remained
a colony. In the forests of the neighbourhood the imperial elephants
were kept. A road, the Via Ardeatina, led to Ardea direct from Rome; the
gate by which it left the Servian wall was the Porta Naevia; a large
tomb behind the baths of Caracalla lay on its course. The gate by which
it left the Aurelian wall has been obliterated by the bastion of Antonio
da Sangallo (Ch. Hülsen in _Römische Mitteilungen_, 1894, 320).

The site of the primitive city, which later became the citadel, is
occupied by the modern town; it is situated at the end of a long plateau
between two valleys, and protected by perpendicular tufa cliffs some 60
ft. high on all sides except the north-east, where it joins the plateau.
Here it is defended by a fine wall of _opus quadratum_ of tufa, in
alternate courses of headers and stretchers. Within its area are scanty
remains of the podium of a temple and of buildings of the imperial
period. The road entering it from the south-west is deeply cut in the
rock. The area of the place was apparently twice extended, a further
portion of the narrow plateau, which now bears the name of Civita
Vecchia, being each time taken in and defended by a mound and ditch; the
nearer and better-preserved is about ½ m. from the city and measures
some 2000 ft. long, 133 ft. wide and 66 ft. high, the ditch being some
80 ft. wide. The second, ½ m. farther north-east, is smaller. In the
cliffs below the plateau to the north are early rock habitations, and
upon the plateau primitive Latin pottery has been found. In 1900 a group
of tombs cut in the rock was examined; they are outside the farther
mound and ditch, and belong, therefore, to the period after the second
extension of the city.

  See O. Richter, in _Annali dell' Istituto_ (1884), 90; J.H. Parker in
  _Archaeologia_, xlix. 169 (1885); A. Pasqui, in _Notizie degli scavi_,
  (1900) 53.     (T. As.)