ARDROSSAN, a seaport, burgh of barony, and police burgh of Ayrshire,
Scotland, 32 m. from Glasgow by the Glasgow & South-Western railway, and
29½ m. by the Lanarkshire & Ayrshire branch of the Caledonian railway.
Pop. (1901) 6077. The rise of Ardrossan was due to the enterprise of
Hugh, 12th earl of Eglinton, who began the construction of the present
town and harbour in 1806. The harbour was intended to be in connexion
with a canal from Glasgow to Ardrossan, but this was only completed as
far as Johnstone. Owing to the costliness of the undertaking, and the
death of the earl in 1819, the works were suspended after an outlay of
£100,000, but his successor completed the scheme on a reduced scale at
an expense of another £100,000. The dock accommodation has since been
considerably extended, and the town enjoys great prosperity. Steamers
run every week-day to Arran and Belfast, and during summer there is a
service also to Douglas in the Isle of Man. The exports consist
principally of coal and iron from collieries and ironworks in the
neighbourhood; and the imports of timber, ores and general goods.
Shipbuilding thrives and the fisheries are important. The town is
governed by a provost and council.

SALTCOATS (pop. 8120), a mile to the south, is a popular seaside resort,
with a brisk trade, due to its proximity to Ardrossan and Stevenston;
the making of salt, once a leading industry, has ceased.

Ardrossan dates from an early period. The name Arthur of Ardrossan is
found in connexion with a charter dated 1226; and Sir Fergus of
Ardrossan accompanied Edward Bruce in his Irish expedition in 1316, and
in 1320 signed the appeal to the pope, made by the barons of Scotland,
against the aggressions of England. The family of Ardrossan is now
merged, by marriage, in that of the earl of Eglinton and Winton. The
castle where Wallace surprised the English garrison and threw their
corpses into the dungeon, grimly styled "Wallace's Larder," was finally
destroyed by Cromwell, who is said to have used part of its masonry for
the construction of the fort at Ayr; but its ruins still exist.