ARES, in ancient Greek mythology, the god of war, or rather of battle,
son of Zeus and Hera. (For the Roman god, identified with Ares, see
MARS.) As contrasted with Athena, who added to her other attributes that
of being the goddess of well-conducted military operations, he
personifies brute strength and the wild rage of conflict. His delight is
in war and bloodshed; he loves fighting for fighting's sake, and takes
the side of the one or the other combatant indifferently, regardless of
the justice of the cause. His quarrelsomeness was regarded as inherited
from his mother, and it may have been only as an illustration of the
perpetual strife between Zeus and Hera that Ares was accounted their
son. According to a later tradition, he was the son of Hera (Juno)
alone, who became pregnant by touching a certain flower (Ovid, _Fasti_,
v. 255). All the gods, even Zeus, hate him, but his bitterest enemy is
Athena, who fells him to the ground with a huge stone. Splendidly armed,
he goes to battle, sometimes on foot, sometimes in the war chariot made
ready by his sons Deimos and Phobos (Panic and Fear) by whom he is
usually accompanied. In his train also are found Enyo, the goddess of
war who delights in bloodshed and the destruction of cities; his sister,
Eris, goddess of fighting and strife; and the Keres, goddesses of death,
whose function it is especially to roam the battle-field, carrying off
the dead to Hades. In later accounts (and even in the _Odyssey_) Ares'
character is somewhat toned down; thus, in the "Homeric" hymn to Ares he
is addressed as the assistant of Themis (Justice), the enemy of tyrants,
and leader of the just. It is to be noted, however, that in this little
poem he is to some extent confounded with the planet named after him
(Ares, or Mars).

The primitive character of Ares has been much discussed. He is a god of
storms; a god of light or a solar god; a chthonian god, one of the
deities of the subterranean world, who could bring prosperity as well as
ruin upon men, although in time his destructive qualities obscured the
others. In this last aspect he was one of the chief gods of the
Thracians, amongst whom his home was placed even in the time of Homer.
In Scythia an old iron sword served as the symbol of the god, to which
yearly sacrifices of cattle and horses were made, and in earlier times
(as apparently also at Sparta) human victims, selected from prisoners of
war, were offered. Thus Ares developed into the god of war, in which
character he made his way into Greece. This theory may have been nothing
more than an instance of the Greek tendency to assign a northern or
"hyperborean" home to deities in whose character something analogous to
the stormy elements of nature was found. But it appears that the
Thracians and Scythians in historical times (Herodotus i. 59) worshipped
chiefly a war god, and that certain Thracian settlements, formed in
Greece in prehistoric times, left behind them traces of the worship of a
god whom the Greeks called Ares. The story of his imprisonment for
thirteen months by the Aloïdae (_Iliad_, v. 385) points to the conquest
of this chthonian destroyer of the fields by the arts of peace,
especially agriculture, of which the grain-fed sons of Aloeus (the
thresher) are the personification.

In Homer Ares is the lover of Aphrodite, the wife of Hephaestus, who
catches them together in a net and holds them up to the ridicule of the
gods. In what appears to be a very early development of her character,
Aphrodite also was a war goddess, known under the name of Areia; and in
Thebes, the most important seat of the worship of Ares, she is his wife,
and bears him Eros and Anteros, Deimos and Phobos, and Harmonia, wife of
Cadmus, the founder of the city (Hesiod, _Theog._ 933). In the legend of
Cadmus and his family Ares plays a prominent part. His worship was not
so widely spread over Greece as that of other gods, although he was
honoured here and there with festivals and sacrifices. Thus, at Sparta,
under the name of Theritas, he was offered young dogs and even human
beings. The Dioscuri were said to have brought his image from Colchis to
Laconia, where it was set up in an old sanctuary on the road from Sparta
to Therapnae. At Athens, he had a temple at the foot of the Areopagus,
with a statue by Alcamenes. It was here, according to the legend, that
he was tried and acquitted by a council of the gods for the murder of
Halirrhothius, who had violated Alcippe, the daughter of Ares by
Agraulos. The figure of Ares appears in various stories of ancient
mythology. Thus, he engages in combat with Heracles on two occasions to
avenge the death of his son Cycnus; once Zeus separates the combatants
by a flash of lightning, but in the second encounter he is severely
wounded by his adversary, who has the active support of Athena; maddened
by jealousy, he changes himself into the boar which slew Adonis, the
favourite of Aphrodite; and stirs up the war between the Lapithae and
Centaurs. His attributes were the spear and the burning torch,
symbolical of the devastation caused by war (in ancient times the
hurling of a torch was the signal for the commencement of hostilities).
The animals sacred to him were the dog and the vulture.

The worship of Ares being less general throughout Greece than that of
the gods of peace, the number of statues of him is small; those of
Ares-Mars, among the Romans, are more frequent. Previous to the 5th
century B.C. he was represented as full-bearded, grim-featured and in
full armour. From that time, apparently under the influence of Athenian
sculptors, he was conceived as the ideal of a youthful warrior, and was
for a time associated with Aphrodite and Eros. He then appears as a
vigorous youth, beardless, with curly hair, broad head and stalwart
shoulders, with helmet and chlamys. In the Villa Ludovisi statue (after
the style of Lysippus) he appears seated, in an attitude of thought; his
arms are laid aside, and Eros peeps out at his feet. In the Borghese
Ares (also taken for Achilles) he is standing, his only armour being the
helmet on his head. He also appears in many other groups, with
Aphrodite, in marble and on engraved gems of Roman times. But before
this grouping had recommended itself to the Romans, with their legend of
Mars and Rhea Silvia, the Greek Ares had again become under Macedonian
influence a bearded, armed and powerful god.

  AUTHORITIES.--H.D. Müller, Ares (1848), H.W. Stoll, _Über die
  ursprungliche Bedeutung des A. und der Athene_ (1881); F.A. Voigt,
  "Beiträge zur Mythologie des Ares und Athena" in _Leipziger Studien_,
  iv. 1881; W.H. Roscher, _Studien zur vergleichenden Mythologie_, i.,
  1873; C. Tümpel, _Ares und Aphrodite_ (1880); articles in
  Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopadie_, Roscher's _Lexikon der
  Mythologie_, and Daremberg and Saglio's _Dictionnaire des Antiquités_
  (s.v. MARS); Preller, _Griechische Mythologie_.