ARETINO, PIETRO (1492-1556), Italian author, was born in 1492 at Arezzo
in Tuscany, from which place he took his name. He is said to have been
the natural son of Luigi Bacci, a gentleman of the town. He received
little education, and lived for some years poor and neglected, picking
up such scraps of information as he could. When very young he was
banished from Arezzo on account of a satirical sonnet which he composed
against indulgences. He went to Perugia, where for some time he worked
as a bookbinder, and continued to distinguish himself by his daring
attacks upon religion. After some years' wandering through parts of
Italy he reached Rome, where his talents, wit and impudence commended
him to the papal court. This favour, however, he lost in 1523 by writing
a set of obscene sonnets, to accompany an equally immoral series of
drawings by the great painter, Giulio Romano. He left Rome and was
received by Giovanni de' Medici, who introduced him at Milan to Francis
I. of France. He gained the good graces of that monarch, and received
handsome presents from him. Shortly after this Aretino attempted to
regain the favour of the pope, but, having come to Rome, he composed a
sonnet against a rival in some low amour, and in return was assaulted
and severely wounded. He could obtain no redress from the pope, and
returned to Giovanni de' Medici. On the death of the latter in December
1526, he withdrew to Venice, where he afterwards continued to reside. He
spent his time here in writing comedies, sonnets, licentious dialogues,
and a few devotional and religious works. He led a profligate life, and
procured funds to satisfy his needs by writing sycophantish letters to
all the nobles and princes with whom he was acquainted. This plan proved
eminently successful, for large sums were given him, apparently from
fear of his satire. So great did Aretino's pride grow, that he styled
himself the "divine," and the "scourge of princes." He died in 1556,
according to some accounts by falling from his chair in a fit of
laughter caused by hearing some indecent story of his sisters. The
reputation of Aretino in his own time rested chiefly on his satirical
sonnets or burlesques; but his comedies, five in number, are now
considered the best of his works. His letters, of which a great number
have been printed, are also commended for their style. The dialogues and
the licentious sonnets have been translated into French, under the title
_Académie des Dames_.