ARGENSON, the name, derived from an old hamlet situated in what is now
the department of Indre-et-Loire, of a French family which produced some
prominent statesmen, soldiers and men of letters.

RENÉ DE VOYER, seigneur d'Argenson (1596-1651), French statesman, was
born on the 21st of November 1596. He was a lawyer by profession, and
became successively _avocat_, councillor at the parlement of Paris,
_maître des requêtes_, and councillor of state. Cardinal Richelieu
entrusted him with several missions as inspector and intendant of the
forces. In 1623 he was appointed intendant of justice, police and
finance in Auvergne, and in 1632 held similar office in Limousin, where
he remained till 1637. After the death of Louis XIII. (1643) he retained
his administrative posts, was intendant of the forces at Toulon (1646),
commissary of the king at the estates of Languedoc (1647), and intendant
of Guienne (1648), and showed great capacity in defending the authority
of the crown against the rebels of the Fronde. After his wife's death he
took orders (February 1651), but did not cease to take part in affairs
of state. In 1651 he was appointed by Mazarin ambassador at Venice,
where he died on the 14th of July 1651.

His son, MARC RENÉ DE VOYER, comte d'Argenson (1623-1700), was born at
Blois on the 13th of December 1623. He also was a lawyer, being
councillor at the parlement of Rouen (1642) and _maître des requêtes_.
He attended his father in all his duties and succeeded him at the
embassy at Venice. In 1655 he returned from his embassy, ruined, and
lost favour with Mazarin, who removed him from his office of councillor
of state. He then gave up public affairs and retired to his estates,
where he occupied himself with good works. In September 1656 he entered
the Company of the Holy Sacrament, a secret society for the diffusion of
the Catholic religion. Besides writing the _Annals_ of the society, he
composed many pious works, which were destroyed in the fire at the
Louvre in 1871. Some of his correspondence with the once famous
letter-writer, Jean Louis Guez de Balzac (1597-1654), has been
published. He died in May 1700, leaving two sons, Marc René (see below),
and François Élie (1656-1728), who became archbishop of Bordeaux.

  See Fr. Rabbe, "Compagnie du Saint-Sacrement," in the _Revue
  historique_ (Nov. 1899); Beaucher-Filleau, _Les Annales de la
  compagnie_ du Saint-Sacrement (Paris, 1900); R. Allier, _La Cobalt des
  dévots_ (Paris, 1902).

MARC RENÉ DE VOYER, marquis de Paulmy and marquis d'Argenson
(1652-1721), son of the preceding, was born at Venice on the 4th of
November 1652. He became _avocat_ in 1669, and lieutenant-general in the
_sénéchaussée_ of Angoulême (1679). After the death of Colbert, who
disliked his family, he went to Paris and married Marguerite Lefèvre de
Caomartin, a kinswoman of the comptroller-general Pontchartrain. This
was the beginning of his fortunes. He became successively _maître des
requêtes_ (1694), member of the _conseil des prises_ (prize court)
(1695), _procureur-général_ of the commission of inquest into false
titles of nobility (1696), and finally lieutenant-general of police
(1697). This last office, which had previously been filled by N.G. de la
Reynie, was very important. It not only gave him the control of the
police, but also the supervision of the corporations, printing press,
and provisioning of Paris. All contraventions of the police regulations
came under his jurisdiction, and his authority was arbitrary and
absolute. Fortunately, he had, in Saint-Simon's phrase, "a nice
discernment as to the degree of rigour or leniency required for every
case that came before him, being ever inclined to the mildest measures,
but possessed of the faculty of making the most innocent tremble before
him; courageous, bold, audacious in quelling _êmeutes_, and consequently
the master of the people." During the twenty-one years that he exercised
this office he was a party to every private and state secret; in fact,
he had a share in every event of any importance in the history of Paris.
He was the familiar friend of the king, who delighted in scandalous
police reports; he was patronized by the duke of Orleans; he was
supported by the Jesuits at court; and he was feared by all. He
organized the supply of food in Paris during the severe winter of 1709,
and endeavoured, but with little success, to run to earth the libellers
of the government. He directed the destruction of the Jansenist
monastery of Port Royal (1709), a proceeding which provoked many
protests and pamphlets. Under the regency, the Chambre de Justice,
assembled to inquire into the malpractices of the financiers, suspected
d'Argenson and arrested his clerks, but dared not lay the blame on him.
On the 28th of January 1718 he voluntarily resigned the office of
lieutenant-general of police for those of keeper of the seals--in the
place of the chancellor d'Aguesseau--and president of the council of
finance. He was appointed by the regent to suppress the resistance of
the parlements and to reorganize the finances, and was in great measure
responsible for permitting John Law to apply his financial system,
though he soon quarrelled with Law and intrigued to bring about his
downfall. The regent threw the blame for the outcome of Law's schemes on
d'Argenson, who was forced to resign his position in the council of
finance (January 1720). By way of compensation he was created
inspector-general of the police of the whole kingdom, but had to resign
his office of keeper of the seals (June 1720). He died on the 8th of May
1721, the people of Paris throwing taunts and stones at his coffin and
accusing him of having ruined the kingdom. In 1716 he had been created
an honorary member of the Académie des Sciences and, in 1718, a member
of the French Academy.

  See the contemporary memoirs, especially those of Saint-Simon (de
  Boislisle's ed.), Dangeau and Math. Marais; Barbier's _Journal_;
  "Correspondance administrative sous Louis XIV." in _Coll. des doc.
  inéd. sur I'histoire de France_, edited by G.B. Depping (1850-1855);
  _Correspondance des contrôleurs-généraux des finances_, pub. by de
  Bois-lisle (1873-1900); _Correspondance de M. de Marville avec M. de
  Maurepas_ (1896-1897); _Rapports de police de René d'Argenson_, pub.
  by P. Cottin (Paris, undated); P. Clément, _La police sous Louis XIV_.
  (1873).

RENÉ LOUIS DE VOYER DE PAULMY, marquis d'Argenson (1694-1757), eldest
son of the preceding, was a lawyer, and held successively the posts of
councillor at the parlement (1716), _maître des requêtes_ (1718),
councillor of state (1719), and intendant of justice, police and finance
in Hainaut. During his five years' tenure of the last office he was
mainly employed in provisioning the troops, who were suffering from the
economic confusion resulting from Law's system. He returned to court in
1724 to exercise his functions as councillor of state. At that time he
had the reputation of being a conscientious man, but ill adapted to
intrigue, and was nicknamed "la bête." He entered into relations with
the philosophers, and was won over to the ideas of reform. He was the
friend of Voltaire, who had been a fellow-student of his at the Jesuit
college Louis-le-grand, and frequented the Club de l'Entresol, the
history of which he wrote in his memoirs. It was then that he prepared
his _Considérations sur le gouvernement de la France_, which was
published posthumously by his son. He was also the friend and counsellor
of the minister G.L. de Chauvelin. In May 1744 he was appointed member
of the council of finance, and in November of the same year the king
chose him as secretary of state for foreign affairs, his brother, the
comte d'Argenson (see below), being at the same time secretary of state
for war. France was at that time engaged in the War of the Austrian
Succession, and the government had been placed by Louis XV. virtually in
the hands of the two brothers. The marquis d'Argenson endeavoured to
reform the system of international relations. He dreamed of a "European
Republic," and wished to establish arbitration between nations in
pursuance of the ideas of his friend the abbé de Saint-Pierre. But he
failed to realize any part of his projects. The generals negotiated in
opposition to his instructions; his colleagues laid the blame on him;
the intrigues of the courtiers passed unnoticed by him; whilst the
secret diplomacy of the king neutralized his initiative. He concluded
the marriage of the dauphin to the daughter of Augustus III., king of
Poland, but was unable to prevent the election of the grand-duke of
Tuscany as emperor in 1745. On the both of January 1747 the king thanked
him for his services. He then retired into private life, eschewed the
court, associated with Voltaire, Condillac and d'Alembert, and spent his
declining years in working at the Academic des Inscriptions, of which he
was appointed president by the king in 1747, and revising his
_Mémoires_. Voltaire, in one of his letters, declared him to be "the
best citizen that had ever tasted the ministry." He died on the 26th of
January 1757.

He left a large number of manuscript works, of which his son, Antoine
René (1722-1787), known as the marquis de Paulmy, published the
_Considérations sur le gouvernement de France_ (Amsterdam, 1764) and
_Essais dans le gout de ceux de Montaigne_ (_ib._ 1785). The latter,
which contains many useful biographical notes and portraits of his
contemporaries, was republished in 1787 as _Loisirs d'un ministre
d'état_. Argenson's most important work, however, is his _Mémoires_,
covering in great detail the years 1725 to 1756, with an introductory
part giving his recollections since the year 1696. They are, as they
were intended to be, valuable "materials for the history of his time."
There are two important editions, the first, with some letters, not
elsewhere published, by the marquis d'Argenson, his great-grand-nephew
(5 vols., Paris, 1857 et seq.); the second, more correct, but less
complete, published by J.B. Rathery, for the Société de l'Histoire de
France (9 vols., Paris, 1859 et seq.). The other works of the marquis
d'Argenson, in MS., were destroyed in the fire at the Louvre library in
1871.

  See Sainte-Beuve, _Causeries du lundi_ (vols. xii. and xiv.);
  Levasseur. "Le Marquis d'Argenson" in the _Mémoires de l'Academie des
  Sciences Morales et Politiques_ (vol. lxxxvii., 1868); and,
  especially, E. Zevort, _Le Marquis d'Argenson et le ministère des
  affaires étrangères_ (Paris, 1880). See also G. de R. de Flassan,
  _Histoire de la diplomatie française_ (2nd ed., 1811); Voltaire,
  _Siècle de Louis XV_.; E. Boutaric, _Correspondance secrète inédite de
  Louis XV_. (1866); E. Champion, "Le Marquis d'Argenson," in the
  _Révolution française_ (vol. xxxvi., 1899); A. Alem, _D'Argenson
  économiste_ (Paris, 1899); Arthur Ogle, _The Marquis d'Argenson_
  (1893).

MARC PIEERE DE VOYER DE PAULMY, comte d'Argenson (1696-1764), younger
brother of the preceding, was born on the 16th of August 1696. Following
the family tradition he studied law and was councillor at the parlement
of Paris. He succeeded his father as lieutenant-general of police in
Paris, but held the post only five months (January 26 to June 30, 1720).
He then received the office of intendant of Tours, and resumed the
lieutenancy of police in 1722. On the 2nd of January 1724 he was
appointed councillor of state. He gained the confidence of the regent
Orleans, administering his fortune and living with his son till 1737.
During this period he opened his salon to the philosophers Chaulieu, la
Fare and Voltaire, and collaborated in the legislative labours of the
chancellor d'Aguesseau. In March 1737 d'Argenson was appointed director
of the censorship of books, in which post he showed sufficiently liberal
views to gain the approval of writers--a rare thing in the reign of
Louis XV. He only retained this post for a year. He became president of
the grand council (November 1738), intendant of the _généralité_ of
Paris (August 1740), was admitted to the king's council (August 1742),
and in January 1743 was appointed secretary of state for war in
succession to the baron de Breteuil. As minister for war he had a heavy
task; the French armies engaged in the War of the Austrian Succession
were disorganized, and the retreat from Prague had produced a disastrous
effect. After consulting with Marshal Saxe, he began the reform of the
new armies. To assist recruiting, he revived the old institution of
local militias, which, however, did not come up to his expectation. In
the spring of 1744 three armies were able to resume the offensive in the
Netherlands, Germany and Italy, and in the following year France won the
battle of Fontenoy, at which d'Argenson was present. After the peace in
1748 he occupied himself with the important work of recasting the French
army on the model of the Prussian. He unified the types of cannon,
grouped the grenadiers into separate regiments, and founded the École
Militaire for the training of officers (1751). An edict of the 1st of
November 1751 granted patents of nobility to all who had the rank of
general officer. In addition to his duties as minister of war he had the
supervision of the printing, postal administration and general
administration of Paris. He was responsible for the arrangement of the
promenade of the Champs Elysées and for the plan of the present Place de
la Concorde. He was exceedingly popular, and, although the court
favourites hated him, he had the support of the king. Nevertheless,
after the attempt of R.F. Damiens to assassinate the king, Louis
abandoned d'Argenson to the machinations of the court favourites and
dismissed both him and his colleague, J.B. de Machault d'Arnouville
(February 1757). D'Argenson was exiled to his estates at Les Ormes near
Saumur, but he had previously found posts for his brother, the marquis
d'Argenson, as minister of foreign affairs, for his son Marc René as
master of the horse, and for his nephew Marc Antoine René as commissary
of war. From the time of his exile he lived in the society of savants
and philosophers. He had been elected member of the Académie des
Inscriptions in 1749. Diderot and d'Alembert dedicated the
_Encyclopedie_ to him, and Voltaire, C.J.F. Hénault, and J.F. Marmontel
openly visited him in his exile. After the death of Madame de Pompadour
he obtained permission to return to Paris, and died a few days after his
return, on the 22nd of August 1764.

MARC ANTOINE RENÉ DE VOYER, marquis de Paulmy d'Argenson (1722-1787),
nephew of the preceding and son of René Louis, was born at Valenciennes
on the 22nd of November 1722. Appointed councillor at the parlement
(1744), and _maître des requêtes_ (1747), he was associated with his
father in the ministry of foreign affairs and with his uncle in the
ministry of war, and, in recognition of this experience, was
commissioned to inspect the troops and fortifications and sent on
embassy to Switzerland (1748). In 1751 his uncle recognized him as his
deputy and made over to him the reversion of the secretariate of war. He
then worked on the great reform of the army, and after the dismissal of
his uncle became minister of war (February 1757). But the outbreak of
the Seven Years' War made this post exceedingly difficult to hold, and
he resigned on the 23rd of March 1758. He was ambassador to Poland from
1762 to 1764, but failed to procure the nomination of the French
candidate to that throne. From 1766 to 1770 he was ambassador at Venice.
Failing to obtain the embassy at Rome, he retired at the age of
forty-eight and devoted the rest of his life to indulging his tastes for
history and biography. He brought together a large library, very rich in
French poetry and romance, and undertook various publications with the
help of his librarian. In 1775 he began his _Bibliothèque universelle
des romans_, of which forty volumes appeared within three years, but
subsequently handed over the publication to other editors. His great
work, _Mélanges tirês d'une grande bibliothèque_, was published in 65
volumes (Paris, 1779-1788). At his death he forbade his library to be
dispersed: it was bought by the comte d'Artois (afterwards Charles X.)
and formed the nucleus of the present Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal at Paris
(the marquis having been governor of the arsenal). He died on the 13th
of August 1787.

  See contemporary memoirs; also Dacier's eulogium in the _Académie des
  Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres_ (November 1788); and Sainte-Beuve,
  _Causeries du lundi_ (vol. xii.).

MARC RENÉ, marquis de Voyer de Paulmy d'Argenson (1721-1782), known as
the marquis de Voyer, son of Marc Pierre de Voyer, the minister of war,
was born in Paris on the 20th of September 1721. He served in the army
of Italy and the army of Flanders in the War of the Austrian Succession,
and was _mestre de camp_ (proprietary colonel) of the regiment of Berry
cavalry at the battle of Fontenoy (May 10, 1745), where he was promoted
brigadier. He was associated with his father in his work of reorganizing
the army, was made inspector of cavalry and dragoons (1749), and
succeeded his father as master of the horse (1752). He introduced
English horses into France. He was lieutenant-general of Upper Alsace in
1753 and governor of Vincennes in 1754, and served afterwards under
Soubise in the Seven Years' War. He was wounded at Crefeld in 1758, and
was promoted lieutenant-general (1759). He followed his father into
exile at Les Ormes (1763), and in the last years of the reign of Louis
XV. sided with the malcontents headed by Choiseul; but on the rupture
with England he rejoined the service of the king (1775). He was
appointed inspector of the sea-board, and put the roadstead of the
island of Aix in a state of defence during the American War of
Independence. He caught marsh-fever while attempting to drain the
marshes of Rochefort, and died at Les Ormes on the 18th of September
1782.

MARC RENÉ MARIE DE VOYER DE PAULMY, marquis d'Argenson (1771-1842), son
of the preceding, was born in Paris in September 1771. He was brought up
by his father's cousin, the marquis de Paulmy, governor of the arsenal,
and was made lieutenant of dragoons in 1789. Although, at the age of
eighteen, he had succeeded to several estates and a large fortune, he
embraced the revolutionary cause, joining the army of the North as
Lafayette's aide-de-camp and remaining with it even after Lafayette's
defection. Leaving France to take one of his sisters to England, he was
denounced on his return as a royalist conspirator, on the charge of
having in his possession portraits of the royal family. He then went to
live in Touraine, married the widow of Prince Victor de Broglie, and
saved her and her children from proscription. He introduced new
agricultural instruments and processes on his estates, and installed
machinery imported from England in his ironworks in Alsace. He was an
enthusiastic adherent of Napoleon, by whom he was appointed in May 1809
prefect of Deux-Nèthes. He helped to repel the English invasion of the
islands of South Beveland and Walcheren (August 1809), and afterwards
directed the defence works of Antwerp, but resigned this post (March
1813) in consequence of the complaints of the inhabitants and the
exacting demands of the emperor. In May 1814 he refused the prefecture
of Marseilles offered to him by the Bourbons, but was elected deputy
from Belfort in 1815 during the Hundred Days. On the 5th of July 1815 he
took part in the declaration protesting against any tampering with the
immutable rights of the nation. He was a member of the _Chambre
introuvable_, where he became one of the orators of the democratic
party. He was one of the founders of the journal _Le censeur européen_
and of the _Club de la liberté de la presse_, and was an uncompromising
opponent of reaction. Not re-elected in 1824 on account of his liberal
ideas, he returned to the chamber under the Martignac ministry (1828),
and resolutely persisted in his championship of the liberty of the press
and of public worship. On the death of his wife he voluntarily renounced
his mandate (July 1829), and hailed the revolution of 1830 with great
satisfaction. On the 3rd of November 1830 he was elected to the chamber
as deputy from Châtellerault, and took the oath, adding, however, the
reservation "subject to the progress of the public reason." His
independent attitude resulted in his defeat in the following year at the
Châtellerault election, but he was returned for Strassburg. He wished
the incidence of the taxes to be arranged according to social condition,
and advocated a single tax proportionate to income like the English
income tax. He harped incessantly on this idea in his speeches and
articles (see his letters in _La Tribune_ of June 20, 1832). Although he
was a proprietor of ironworks he opposed the protectionist laws, which
he considered injurious to the workmen. He became the mouthpiece of the
advanced ideas; subsidized the opposition newspapers, especially the
_National_; received into his house F.M. Buonarroti, who in 1796 had
been implicated in the conspiracy of "Gracchus" Babeuf (q.v.); and
became a member of the committee of the Society of the Rights of Man. He
was even sued in the courts for a pamphlet called _Boutade d'un homme
riche a sentiments populaires_, and delivered a speech to the jury in
which he displayed very daring social theories. But he gradually grew
discouraged and retired from public affairs, refusing even municipal
office, and living in seclusion at La Grange in the forest of Guerche,
where he devoted his inventive faculty to devising agricultural
improvements. He subsequently returned to Paris, where he died on the
1st of August 1842.

CHARLES MARC RENÉ DE VOYER, marquis d'Argenson (1796-1862), son of the
preceding, was born at Boulogne-sur-Spine on the 20th of April 1796. He
concerned himself little with politics. He was, however, a member of the
council-general of Vienne for six years, but was expelled from it in
1840 in consequence of his advanced ideas and his relations with the
Opposition. In 1848 he was elected deputy from Vienne to the Constituent
Assembly by 12,000 votes. He was an active member of the Archaeological
Society of Touraine and the Society of Antiquaries of the West, and
wrote learned works for these bodies. He collaborated in preparing the
archives of the scientific congress at Tours in 1847; brought out two
editions of the MSS. of his great-grand-uncle, the minister of foreign
affairs under Louis XV., under the title _Mémoires du marquis
d'Argenson_, one in 1825, and the other, in 5 vols., in 1857-1858; and
published _Discours et opinions de mon père, M. Voyer d'Argenson_ (2
vols., 1845). He died on the 31st of July, 1862.