ARGOS, the name of several ancient Greek cities or districts, but
specially appropriated in historic times to the chief town in eastern
Peloponnese, whence the peninsula of Argolis derives its name. The
Argeia, or territory of Argos proper, consisted of a shelving plain at
the head of the Gulf of Argolis, enclosed between the eastern wall of
the Arcadian plateau and the central highlands of Argolis. The waters of
this valley (Inachus, Charadrus, Erasinus), when properly regulated,
favoured the growth of excellent crops, and the capital standing only 3
m. from the sea was well placed for Levantine trade. Hence Argos was
perhaps the earliest town of importance in Greece; the legends indicate
its high antiquity and its early intercourse with foreign countries
(Egypt, Lycia, &c.). Though eclipsed in the Homeric age, when it appears
as the seat of Diomedes, by the later foundation of Mycenae, it regained
its predominance after the invasion of the Dorians (q.v.), who seem to
have occupied this site in considerable force. In accordance with the
tradition which assigned the portion to the eldest-born of the Heracleid
conquerors, Argos was for some centuries the leading power in
Peloponnesus. There is good evidence that its sway extended originally
over the entire Argolis peninsula, the land east of Parnon, Cythera,
Aegina and Sicyon. Under King Pheidon the Argive empire embraced all
eastern Peloponnesus, and its influence spread even to the western
districts.

This supremacy was first challenged about the 8th century by Sparta.
Though organized on similar lines, with a citizen population divided
into three Dorian tribes (and one containing other elements), with a
class of Perioeci (neighbouring dependents) and of serfs, the Argives
had no more constant foe than their Lacedaemonian kinsmen. In a
protracted struggle for the possession of the eastern seaboard of
Laconia in spite of the victory at Hysiae (apparently in 669), they were
gradually driven back, until by 550 they had lost the whole coast strip
of Cynuria. A later attempt to retrieve this loss resulted in a crushing
defeat near Tiryns at the hands of King Cleomenes I. (probably in 495),
which so weakened the Argives that they had to open the franchise to
their Perioeci. By this time they had also lost control over the other
cities of Argolis, which they never succeeded in recovering. Partly in
consequence of its defeat, partly out of jealousy against Sparta, Argos
took no part in the war against Xerxes. Indeed on this, as on later
occasions, its relations with Persia seem to have been friendly. About
470 the conflict with Sparta was renewed in concert with the Arcadians,
but all that the Argives could achieve was to destroy their revolted
dependencies of Mycenae and Tiryns (468 or 464). In 461 they contracted
an alliance with Athens, thus renewing a connexion established by
Peisistratus (q.v.). In spite of this league Argos made no headway
against Sparta, and in 451 consented to a truce. A more important result
of Athenian intervention was the substitution of the democratic
government for the oligarchy which had succeeded the early monarchy; at
any rate forty years later we find that Argos possessed complete
democratic institutions.

During the early Peloponnesian War Argos remained neutral; after the
break-up of the Spartan confederacy consequent upon the peace of Nicias
the alliance of this state, with its unimpaired resources and
flourishing commerce, was courted on all sides. By throwing in her lot
with the Peloponnesian democracies and Athens, Argos seriously
endangered Sparta's supremacy, but the defeat of Mantineia (418) and a
successful rising of the Argive oligarchs spoilt this chance. The
speedily restored democracy put little heart into the conflict, and
beyond sending mercenary detachments, lent Athens no further help in the
war (see PELOPONNESIAN WAR).

At the outset of the 4th century, Argos, with a population and resources
equalling those of Athens, took a prominent part in the Corinthian
League against Sparta. In 394 the Argives helped to garrison Corinth,
and the latter state seems for a while to have been annexed by them. But
the peace of Antalcidas (q.v.) dissolved this connexion, and barred
Argive pretensions to control all Argolis. After the battle of Leuctra
Argos experienced a political crisis; the oligarchs attempted a
revolution, but were put down by their opponents with such
vindictiveness that 1200 of them are said to have been executed (370).
The democracy consistently supported the victorious Thebans against
Sparta, figuring with a large contingent on the decisive field of
Mantineia (362). When pressed in turn by their old foes the Argives were
among the first to call in Philip of Macedon, who reinstated them in
Cynuria after becoming master of Greece. In the Lamian War Argos was
induced to side with the patriots against Macedonia; after its capture
by Cassander from Polyperchon (317) it fell in 303 into the hands of
Demetrius Poliorcetes. In 272 the Argives joined Sparta in resisting the
ambition of King Pyrrhus of Epirus, whose death ensued in an
unsuccessful night attack upon the city. They passed instead into the
power of Antigonus Gonatas of Macedonia, who maintained his control by
means of tyrants. After several unavailing attempts Aratus (q.v.)
contrived to win Argos for the Achaean League (229), in which it
remained save during a brief occupation by the Spartans Cleomenes III.
(q.v.) and Nabis (224 and 196).

The Roman conquest of Achaea enhanced the prosperity of Argos by
removing the trade competition of Corinth. Under the Empire, Argos was
the headquarters of the Achaean synod, and continued to be a resort of
Roman merchants. Though plundered by the Goths in A.D. 267 and 395 it
retained some of its commerce and culture in Byzantine days. The town
was captured by the Franks in 1210; after 1246 it was held in fief by
the rulers of Athens. In later centuries it became the scene of frequent
conflicts between the Venetians and the Turks, and on two occasions
(1397 and 1500) its population was massacred by the latter. Repeopled
with Albanian settlers, Argos was chosen as seat of the Greek national
assembly in the wars of independence. Its citadel was courageously
defended by the patriots (1822); in 1825 the city was burnt to the
ground by Ibrahim Pasha. The present town of 10,000 inhabitants is a
purely agricultural settlement. The Argive plain, though not yet
sufficiently reclaimed, yields good crops of corn, rice and tobacco.

In the early days of Greece the Argives enjoyed high repute for their
musical talent. Their school of bronze sculpture, whose first famous
exponent was Ageladas (Hagelaidas), the reputed master of Pheidias,
reached its climax towards the end of the 5th century in the atelier of
Polyclitus (q.v.) and his pupils. To this period also belongs the new
Heraeum (see below), one of the most splendid temples of Greece.

Remains of the early city are still visible on the Larissa acropolis,
which towers 900 ft. high to the north-west of the town. A few courses
of the ancient ramparts appear under the double enceinte of the
surviving medieval fortress. An aqueduct of Greek times is represented
by some fragments on the south-western edge. In the slope above the town
was hewn a theatre equalling that of Athens in size. The Aspis or
smaller citadel to the north-east has revealed traces of an early
Mycenaean settlement; the Deiras or ridge connecting the two heights
contains a prehistoric cemetery.

  AUTHORITIES.--Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon; Plutarch, _Pyrrhus_,
  30-34; Strabo pp. 373-374; Pausanias ii. 15-24; W.M. Leake, _Travels
  in the Morea_ (London, 1835), ii. chs. 19-22; E. Curtius,
  _Peloponnesos_ (Gotha, 1851), ii. 350-364; H.F. Tozer, _Geography of
  Greece_ (London, 1873), pp. 292-294; J.K. Kophiniotis, [Greek:
  Historia ton Argous] (Athens, 1892-1893); W. Vollgraff in _Bulletin de
  Correspondance Hellénique_ (1904, pp. 364-399; 1906, pp. 1-45; 1907,
  pp. 139-184).     (M. O. B. C.)

_The Argive Heraeum._--Since 1892 investigation has added considerably
to our knowledge concerning the Argive Heraeum or Heraion, the temple of
Hera, which stood, according to Pausanias, "on one of the lower slopes
of Euboea." The term Euboea did not designate the eminence upon which
the Heraeum is placed, or the mountain-top behind the Heraeum only, but,
as Pausanias distinctly indicates, the group of foothills of the hilly
district adjoining the mountain. When once we admit that this designated
not only the mountain, which is 1730 ft. high, but also the hilly
district adjoining it, the general scale of distance for this site grows
larger. The territory of the Heraeum was divided into three parts,
namely Euboea, Acraea and Prosymna. Pausanias tells us that the Heraeum
is 15 stadia from Mycenae. Strabo, on the other hand, says that the
Heraeum was 40 stadia from Argos and 10 from Mycenae. Both authors
underestimate the distance from Mycenae, which is about 25 stadia, or a
little more than 3 m., while the distance from Argos is 45 stadia, or a
little more than 5 m. The distance from the Heraeum to the ancient Midea
is slightly greater than to Mycenae, while that from the Heraeum to
Tiryns is about 6 m. The Argive Heraeum was the most important centre of
Hera and Juno worship in the ancient world; it always remained the chief
sanctuary of the Argive district, and was in all probability the
earliest site of civilized life in the country inhabited by the Argive
people. In fact, whereas the site of Hissarlik, the ancient Troy, is not
in Greece proper, but in Asia Minor, and can thus not furnish the most
direct evidence for the earliest Hellenic civilization as such; and
whereas Tiryns, Mycenae, and the city of Argos, each represent only one
definite period in the successive stages of civilization, the Argive
Heraeum, holding the central site of early civilization in Greece
proper, not only retained its importance during the three periods marked
by the supremacy of Tiryns, Mycenae and the city of Argos, but in all
probability antedated them as a centre of civilized Argive life. These
conditions alone account for the extreme archaeological importance of
this ancient sanctuary.

According to tradition the Heraeum was founded by Phoroneus at least
thirteen generations before Agamemnon and the Achaeans ruled. It is
highly probable that before it became important merely as a temple, it
was the fortified centre uniting the Argive people dwelling in the
plain, the citadel which was superseded in this function by Tiryns.
There is ample evidence to show that it was the chief sanctuary during
the Tirynthian period. When Mycenae was built under the Perseïds it was
still the chief sanctuary for that centre, which superseded Tiryns in
its dominance over the district, and which this temple clearly antedated
in construction. According to the _Dictys Cretensis_, it was at this
Heraeum that Agamemnon assembled the leaders before setting out for
Troy. In the period of Dorian supremacy, in spite of the new cults which
were introduced by these people, the Heraeum maintained its supreme
importance: it was here that the tablets recording the succession of
priestesses were kept which served as a chronological standard for the
Argive people, and even far beyond their borders; and it was here that
Pheidon deposited the [Greek: obeliskoi] when he introduced coinage into
Greece.

We learn from Strabo that the Heraeum was the joint sanctuary for
Mycenae and Argos. But in the 5th century the city of Argos vanquished
the Mycenaeans, and from that time onwards the city of Argos becomes the
political centre of the district, while the Heraeum remains the
religious centre. And when in the year 423 B.C., through the negligence
of the priestess Chryseis, the old temple was burnt down, the Argives
erected a splendid new temple, built by Eupolemos, in which was placed
the great gold and ivory statue of Hera, by the sculptor Polyclitus, the
contemporary and rival of Pheidias, which was one of the most perfect
works of sculpture in antiquity. Pausanias describes the temple and its
contents (ii. 17), and in his time he still saw the ruins of the older
burnt temple above the temple of Eupolemos.

[Illustration: PLAN OF THE HERAEUM (_surveyed and drawn by Edward L.
Tilton_).

     I. Old Temple.
    II. Stoa.
   III. Stoa.
    IV. East Building.
     V. 5th-Century Temple.
    VI. South Stoa.
   VII. West Building.
  VIII. North-West Building.
    IX. Roman Building.
     X. Lower Stoa.
    XI. Phylakeion.
    A, B, C, D, E, F, Cisterns.]

All these facts have been verified and illustrated by the excavations of
the American Archaeological Institute and School of Athens, which were
carried on from 1892 to 1895. In 1854 A.R. Rhangabé made tentative
excavations on this site, digging a trench along the north and east
sides of the second temple. Of these excavations no trace was to be seen
when those of 1892 were begun. The excavations have shown that the
sanctuary, instead of consisting of but one temple with the ruins of the
older one above it, contained at least eleven separate buildings,
occupying an area of about 975 ft. by 325.

On the uppermost terrace, defined by the great Cyclopean supporting
wall, exactly as described by Pausanias, the excavations revealed a
layer of ashes and charred wood, below which were found numerous objects
of earliest date, together with some remains of the walls resting on a
polygonal platform--all forming part of the earliest temple. Immediately
adjoining the Cyclopean wall and below it were found traces of small
houses of the rudest, earliest masonry which are pre-Mycenaean, if not
pre-Cyclopean.

We then descend to the second terrace, in the centre of which the
substructure of the great second temple was revealed, together with so
much of the walls, as well as the several architectural members forming
the superstructure, that it has been possible for E.L. Tilton to design
a complete restoration of the temple. On the northern side of this
terrace, between the second temple and the Cyclopean supporting wall, a
long stoa or colonnade runs from east to west abutting at the west end
in structures which evidently contained a well-house and waterworks;
while at the eastern end of this stoa a number of chambers were erected
against the hill, in front of which were placed statues and
inscriptions, the bases for which are still extant. At the eastern-most
end of this second terrace a large hall with three rows of columns in
the interior, with a porch and entrance at the west end facing the
temple, is built upon elaborate supporting walls of good masonry.

Below the second terrace at the south-west end a large and complicated
building, with an open courtyard surrounded on three sides by a
colonnade and with chambers opening out towards the north, may have
served as a gymnasium or a sanatorium. It is of good early Greek
architecture, earlier than the second temple. A curious, ruder building
to the north of this and to the west of the second terrace is probably
of much earlier date, perhaps of the Mycenaean period, and may have
served as propylaea.

Immediately below the second temple at the foot of the elevation on
which this temple stands, towards the south, and thus facing the city of
Argos, a splendid stoa or colonnade, to which large flights of steps
lead, was erected about the time of the building of the second temple.
It is a part of the great plan to give worthy access to the temple from
the city of Argos. To the east of this large flights of steps lead up to
the temple proper.

At the western extremity of the whole site, immediately beside the
river-bed, we again have a huge stoa running round two sides of a
square, which was no doubt connected with the functions of this
sanctuary as a health resort, especially for women, the goddess Hera
presiding over and protecting married life and child-birth. Finally,
immediately to the north of this western stoa there is an extensive
house of Roman times also connected with baths.

While the buildings give archaeological evidence for every period of
Greek life and history from the pre-Mycenaean period down to Roman
times, the topography itself shows that the Heraeum must have been
constructed before Mycenae and without any regard to it. The foothills
which it occupies form the western boundary to the Argive plain as it
stretches down towards the sea in the Gulf of Nauplia. While it was thus
probably chosen as the earliest site for a citadel facing the sea, its
second period points towards Tiryns and Midea. It could not have been
built as the sanctuary of Mycenae, which was placed farther up towards
the north-west in the hills, and could not be seen from the Heraeum, its
inhabitants again not being able to see their sanctuary. The west
building, the traces of bridges and roads, show that at one time it did
hold some relation to Mycenae; but this was long after its foundation or
the building of the huge Cyclopean supporting wall which is coeval with
the walls of Tiryns, these again being earlier than those of Mycenae.
There are, moreover, traces of still more primitive walls, built of rude
small stones placed one upon the other without mortar, which are in
character earlier than those of Tiryns, and have their parallel in the
lowest layers of Hissarlik.

Bearing out the evidence of tradition as well as architecture, the
numerous finds of individual objects in terra-cotta figurines, vases,
bronzes, engraved stones, &c., point to organized civilized life on this
site many generations before Mycenae was built, _a fortiori_ before the
life as depicted by Homer flourished--nay, before, as tradition has it,
under Proetus the walls of Tiryns were erected. We are aided in forming
some estimate of the chronological sequence preceding the Mycenaean age,
as suggested by the finds of the Heraeum, in the new distribution which
Dörpfeld has been led to make of the chronological stratification of
Hissarlik. For the layer, which he now assigns to the Mycenaean period,
is the sixth stratum from below. Now, as some of the remains at the
Heraeum correspond to the two lowest layers of Hissarlik, the evidence
of the Argive temple leads us far beyond the date assigned to the
Mycenaean age, and at least into the second millennium B.C. (see also
AEGEAN CIVILIZATION). As to its chronological relation to the Cretan
sites--Cnossus, Phaestus, &c., and the "Minoan" civilization as
determined by Dr A. Evans, see the discussion under CRETE.

This sanctuary still holds a position of central importance as
illustrating the art of the highest period in Greek history, namely, the
art of the 5th century B.C. under the great sculptor Polyclitus. Though
the excavations in the second temple have clearly revealed the outlines
of the base upon which the great gold and ivory statue of Hera stood, it
is needless to say that no trace of the statue itself has been found.
From Pausanias we learn that "the image of Hera is seated and is of
colossal size: it is made of gold and ivory, and is the work of
Polyclitus." Based on the computations made by the architect of the
American excavations, E.L. Tilton, on the ground of the height of the
nave, the total height of the image, including the base and the top of
the throne, would be about 26 ft., the seated figure of the goddess
herself about 18 ft. It is probable that the face, neck, arms and feet
were of ivory, while the rest of the figure was draped in gold. Like the
Olympian Zeus of Pheidias, Hera was seated on an elaborately decorated
throne, holding in her left hand the sceptre, surmounted in her case by
the cuckoo (as that of Zeus had an eagle), and in her right, instead of
an elaborate figure of Victory (such as the Athena Parthenos and the
Olympian Zeus held), simply a pomegranate. The crown was adorned with
figures of Graces and the Seasons. A Roman imperial coin of Antoninus
Pius shows us on a reduced scale the general composition of the figure;
while contemporary Argive coins of the 5th century give a fairly
adequate rendering of the head. A further attempt has been made to
identify the head in a beautiful marble bust in the British Museum
hitherto known as Bacchus (Waldstein, _Journal of Hellenic Studies_,
vol. xxi., 1901, pp. 30 seq.)

We also learn from Pausanias that the temple was decorated with
"sculptures over the columns, representing some the birth of Zeus and
the battle of the gods and giants, others the Trojan War and the taking
of Ilium." It was formerly supposed that the phrase "over the columns"
pointed to the existence of sculptured metopes, but no pedimental
groups. Finds made in the excavations, however, have shown that the
temple also had pedimental groups. Besides numerous fragments of nude
and draped figures belonging to pedimental statues, a well-preserved and
very beautiful head of a female divinity, probably Hera, as well as a
draped female torso of excellent workmanship, both belonging to the
pediments, have been discovered. Of the metopes also a great number of
fragments have been found, together with two almost complete metopes,
the one containing the torso of a nude warrior in perfect preservation,
as well as ten well-preserved heads. These statues bear the same
relation to the sculptor Polyclitus which the Parthenon marbles hold to
Pheidias; and the excavations have thus yielded most important material
for the illustration of the Argive art of Polyclitus in the 5th century
B.C.

  See Waldstein, _The Argive Heraeum_ (vol. i., Boston and New York,
  1902; vol. ii., the Vases by J.C. Hoppin, the Bronzes by H.F. de
  Cosa, 1905); _Excavations of the American School of Athens at the
  Heraion of Argos_ (1892); and numerous reports and articles in the
  _American Archaeological Journal_ since 1892.     (C. W.*)