ARGONAUTS ([Greek: Argonautai], the sailors of the "Argo"), in Greek
legend a band of heroes who took part in the Argonautic expedition under
the command of Jason, to fetch the golden fleece. This task had been
imposed on Jason by his uncle Pelias (q.v.), who had usurped the throne
of Iolcus in Thessaly, which rightfully belonged to Jason's father
Aeson. The story of the fleece was as follows. Jason's uncle Athamas had
two children, Phrixus and Helle, by his wife Nephele, the cloud goddess.
But after a time he became enamoured of Ino, the daughter of Cadmus, and
neglected Nephele, who disappeared in anger. Ino, who hated the children
of Nephele, persuaded Athamas, by means of a false oracle, to offer
Phrixus as a sacrifice, as the only means of alleviating a famine which
she herself had caused by ordering the grain to be secretly roasted
before it was sown. But before the sacrifice the shade of Nephele
appeared to Phrixus, bringing a ram with a golden fleece on which he and
his sister Helle endeavoured to escape over the sea. Helle fell off and
was drowned in the strait, which after her was called the Hellespont.
Phrixus, however, reached the other side in safety, and proceeding by
land to Aea in Colchis on the farther shore of the Euxine Sea,
sacrificed the ram, and hung up its fleece in the grove of Ares, where
it was guarded by a sleepless dragon.

Jason, having undertaken the quest of the fleece, called upon the
noblest heroes of Greece to take part in the expedition. According to
the original story, the crew consisted of the chief members of Jason's
own race, the Minyae. But when the legend became common property, other
and better-known heroes were added to their number--Orpheus, Castor and
Polydeuces (Pollux), Zetes and Calais, the winged sons of Boreas,
Meleager, Theseus, Heracles. The crew was supposed to consist of fifty,
agreeing in number with the fifty oars of the "Argo," so called from its
builder Argos, the son of Phrixus, or from [Greek: argos] (swift). It
was a larger vessel than had ever been seen before, built of pine-wood
that never rotted from Mount Pelion. The goddess Athena herself
superintended its construction, and inserted in the prow a piece of oak
from Dodona, which was endowed with the power of speaking and delivering
oracles. The outward course of the "Argo" was the same as that of the
Greek traders, whose settlements as early as the 6th century B.C. dotted
the southern shores of the Euxine. The first landing-place was the
island of Lemnos, which was occupied only by women, who had put to death
their fathers, husbands and brothers. Here the Argonauts remained some
months, until they were persuaded by Heracles to leave. It is known from
Herodotus (iv. 145) that the Minyae had formed settlements at Lemnos at
a very early date. Proceeding up the Hellespont, they sailed to the
country of the Doliones, by whose king, Cyzicus, they were hospitably
received. After their departure, being driven back to the same place by
a storm, they were attacked by the Doliones, who did not recognize them,
and in a battle which took place Cyzicus was killed by Jason. After
Cyzicus had been duly mourned and buried, the Argonauts proceeded along
the coast of Mysia, where occurred the incident of Heracles and Hylas
(q.v.). On reaching the country of the Bebryces, they again landed to
get water, and were challenged by the king, Amycus, to match him with a
boxer. Polydeuces came forward, and in the end overpowered his
adversary, and bound him to a tree, or according to others, slew him. At
the entrance to the Euxine, at Salmydessus on the coast of Thrace, they
met Phineus, the blind and aged king whose food was being constantly
polluted by the Harpies. He knew the course to Colchis, and offered to
tell it, if the Argonauts would free him from the Harpies. This was done
by the winged sons of Boreas, and Phineus now told them their course,
and that the way to pass through the Symplegades or Cyanean rocks--two
cliffs which moved on their bases and crushed whatever sought to
pass--was first to fly a pigeon through, and when the cliffs, having
closed on the pigeon, began to retire to each side, to row the "Argo"
swiftly through. His advice was successfully followed, and the "Argo"
made the passage unscathed, except for trifling damage to the stern.
From that time the rocks became fixed and never closed again. The next
halting-places were the country of the Maryandini, where the helmsman
Tiphys died, and the land of the Amazons on the banks of the Thermodon.
At the island of Aretias they drove away the Stymphalian birds, who used
their feathers of brass as arrows. Here they found and took on board the
four sons of Phrixus who, after their father's death, had been sent by
Aeetes, king of Colchis, to fetch the treasures of Orchomenus, but had
been driven by a storm upon the island. Passing near Mount Caucasus,
they heard the groans of Prometheus and the flapping of the wings of the
eagle which gnawed his liver. They now reached their goal, the river
Phasis, and the following morning Jason repaired to the palace of
Aeetes, and demanded the golden fleece. Aeetes required of Jason that
he should first yoke to a plough his bulls, given him by Hephaestus,
which snorted fire and had hoofs of brass, and with them plough the
field of Ares. That done, the field was to be sown with the dragons'
teeth brought by Phrixus, from which armed men were to spring.
Successful so far by means of the mixture which Medea, daughter of
Aeetes, had given him as proof against fire and sword, Jason was next
allowed to approach the dragon which watched the fleece; Medea soothed
the monster with another mixture, and Jason became master of the fleece.
Then the voyage homeward began, Medea accompanying Jason, and Aeetes
pursuing them. To delay him and obtain escape, Medea dismembered her
young brother Absyrtus, whom she had taken with her, and cast his limbs
about in the sea for his father to pick up. Her plan succeeded, and
while Aeetes was burying the remains of his son at Tomi, Jason and Medea
escaped. In another account Absyrtus had grown to manhood then, and met
his death in an encounter with Jason, in pursuit of whom he had been
sent. Of the homeward course various accounts are given. In the oldest
(Pindar) the "Argo" sailed along the river Phasis into the eastern
Oceanus, round Asia to the south coast of Libya, thence to the mythical
lake Tritonis, after being carried twelve days over land through Libya,
and thence again to Iolcus. Hecataeus of Miletus (Schol. Apollon. Rhod.
iv. 259) suggested that from the Oceanus it may have sailed into the
Nile, and so to the Mediterranean. Others, like Sophocles, described the
return voyage as differing from the outward course only in taking the
northern instead of the southern shore of the Euxine. Some
(pseudo-Orpheus) supposed that the Argonauts had sailed up the river
Tanaïs, passed into another river, and by it reached the North Sea,
returning to the Mediterranean by the Pillars of Hercules. Again, others
(Apollonius Rhodius) laid down the course as up the Danube (Ister), from
it into the Adriatic by a supposed mouth of that river, and on to
Corcyra, where a storm overtook them. Next they sailed up the Eridanus
into the Rhodanus, passing through the country of the Celts and
Ligurians to the Stoechades, then to the island of Aethalia (Elba),
finally reaching the Tyrrhenian Sea and the island of Circe, who
absolved them from the murder of Absyrtus. Then they passed safely
through Scylla and Charybdis, past the Sirens, through the Planctae,
over the island of the Sun, Trinacria and on to Corcyra again, the land
of the Phaeacians, where Jason and Medea held their nuptials. They had
sighted the coast of Peloponnesus when a storm overtook them and drove
them to the coast of Libya, where they were saved from a quicksand by
the local nymphs. The "Argo" was now carried twelve days and twelve
nights to the Hesperides, and thence to lake Tritonis (where the seer
Mopsus died), whence Triton conducted them to the Mediterranean. At
Crete the brazen Talos, who would not permit them to land, was killed by
the Dioscuri. At Anaphe, one of the Sporades, they were saved from a
storm by Apollo. Finally, they reached Iolcus, and the "Argo" was placed
in a groove sacred to Poseidon on the isthmus of Corinth. Jason's death,
it is said, was afterwards caused by part of the stern giving way and
falling upon him.

The story of the expedition of the Argonauts is very old. Homer was
acquainted with it and speaks of the "Argo" as well known to all men;
the wanderings of Odysseus may have been partly founded on its voyage.
Pindar, in the fourth Pythian ode. gives the oldest detailed account of
it. In Greek, there are also extant the _Argonautica_ of Apollonius
Rhodius and the pseudo-Orpheus (4th century A.D.), and the account in
Apollodorus (i. 9), based on the best extant authorities; in Latin, the
imitation of Apollonius (a free translation or adaptation of whose
_Argonautica_ was made by Terentius Varro Atacinus in the time of
Cicero) by Valerius Flaccus. In ancient times the expedition was
regarded as a historical fact, an incident in the opening up of the
Euxine to Greek commerce and colonization. Its object was the
acquisition of gold, which was caught by the inhabitants of Colchis in
fleeces as it was washed down the rivers. Suidas says that the fleece
was a book written on parchment, which taught how to make gold by
chemical processes. The rationalists explained the ram on which Phrixus
crossed the sea as the name or ornament of the ship on which he escaped.
Several interpretations of the legend have been put forward by modern
scholars. According to C.O. Müller, it had its origin in the worship of
Zeus Laphystius; the fleece is the pledge of reconciliation; Jason is a
propitiating god of health, Medea a goddess akin to Hera; Aeetes is
connected with the Colchian sun-worship. Forchhammer saw in it an old
nature symbolism; Jason, the god of healing and fruitfulness, brought
the fleece--the fertilizing rain-cloud--to the western land that was
parched by the heat of the sun. Others treat it as a solar myth; the ram
is the light of the sun, the flight of Phrixus and the death of Helle
signify its setting, the recovery of the fleece its rising again.

  There are numerous treatises on the subject: F. Vater, _Der
  Argonautenzug_ (1845); J. Stender, _De Argonautarum Expeditione_
  (1874); D. Kennerknecht, _De Argonautarum Fabula_ (1886); M. Groeger,
  _De Argonautarum Fabularum Historia_ (1889); see also Grote, _History
  of Greece_, part i. ch. 13; Preller, _Griechische Mythologie_;
  articles in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopädie_, Roscher's _Lexikon der
  Mythologie_, and Daremberg and Saglio's _Dictionnaire des Antiquités_.