ARGYLLSHIRE, a county on the west coast of Scotland, the second largest
in the country, embracing a large tract of country on the mainland and a
number of the Hebrides or Western Isles. The mainland portion is bounded
N. by Inverness-shire; E. by Perth and Dumbarton, Loch Long and the
Firth of Clyde; S. by the North Channel (Irish Sea); and W. by the
Atlantic. Its area is 1,990,471 acres or 3110 sq. m. The principal
districts are Ardnamurchan on the Atlantic, Ardnamurchan Point being the
most westerly headland of Scotland; Morven or Morvern, bounded by Loch
Sunart, the Sound of Mull and Loch Linnhe; Appin, on Loch Linnhe, with
piers at Ballachulish and Port Appin; Benderloch, lying between Loch
Creran and Loch Etive; Lorne, surrounding Loch Etive and giving the
title of marquess to the Campbells; Argyll, in the middle of the shire,
containing Inveraray Castle and furnishing the titles of earl and duke
to the Campbells; Cowall, between Loch Fyne and the Firth of Clyde, in
which lie Dunoon and other favourite holiday resorts; Knapdale between
the Sound of Jura and Loch Fyne; and Kintyre or Cantyre, a long narrow
peninsula (which, at the isthmus of Tarbert, is little more than 1 m.
wide), the southernmost point of which is known as the Mull, the nearest
part of Scotland to the coast of Ireland, only 13 m. distant.

There are no navigable rivers. The two principal mountain streams are
the Orchy and Awe. The Orchy flows from Loch Tulla through Glen Orchy,
and falls into the north-eastern end of Loch Awe; and the Awe drains the
loch at its north-western extremity, discharging into Loch Etive. Among
other streams are the Add, Aray, Coe or Cona, Creran, Douglas, Eachaig,
Etive, Euchar, Feochan, Finart, Fyne, Kinglass, Nell, Ruel, Shiel,
Shira, Strae and Uisge-Dhu. The county is remarkable for the numerous
sea-lochs which deeply indent the coast, the principal being Loch Long
(with its branches Loch Goil and the Holy Loch), Loch Striven
(Rothesay's "weather glass"), Loch Riddon, Loch Fyne (with Loch Gilp and
Loch Gair), Lochs Tarbert, Killisport, Swin, Crinan, Craignish, Melfort,
Feochan, Etive, Linnhe (with its branches Loch Creran, Loch Leven and
Loch Eil) and Sunart. There are also a large number of inland lakes, the
total area of which is about 25,000 acres. Of these the principal are
Lochs Awe, Avich, Eck, Lydoch and Shiel. The principal islands are Mull,
Islay, Jura, Colonsay, Lismore, Tyree, Coll, Gigha, Luing and Kerrera.
Besides these there are the two small but interesting islands of Staffa
and Iona. The mountains are so many as to give the shire a markedly
rugged character. Some of them are among the loftiest in the kingdom, as
Ben Cruachan with its summit of twin pyramids (3689 ft.), Ben More, in
Mull (3172), Ben Ima (3318), Buachaille Etive (3345), Ben Bui (3106),
Ben Lui (or Loy), on the confines of the shires of Perth and Argyll
(3708), Ben Starav near the head of Loch Etive (3541), and Ben Arthur,
called from its shape "The Cobbler" (2891), on the borders of
Dumbartonshire. There are many picturesque glens, of which the
best-known are Glen Aray, Glen Croe, Glen Etive, Glendaruel, Glen Lochy
("the wearisome glen"--some 10 m. of bare hills and boulders--between
Tyndrum and Dalmally), Glen Strae, Hell's Glen (off Lech Goil) and
Glencoe, the scene of the massacre in 1692. The waterfalls of Cruachan
are beautiful; and those of Connel, which are more in the nature of
rapids, caused by the rush of the ebbing tide over the rocky bar at the
narrowing mouth of Loch Etive, have been made celebrated by Ossian, who
called them "the Falls of Lora." In several of the glens, as Glen Aray,
small falls may be seen, enhanced in beauty when the rivers are in
flood. Pre-eminently Argyll is the shire of the sportsman. The lovely
Western Isles provide endless enjoyment for the yachtsman; the lochs and
rivers abound with salmon and trout; the deer forests and grouse moors
are second to none in Scotland.

  _Geology._--The mainland portion of the county consists chiefly of the
  metamorphic rocks of the Eastern Highlands, nearly all the
  subdivisions of that series (see SCOTLAND: _Geology_) being
  represented. They form parallel belts of varying width trending
  north-east and south-west. The slates and phyllites referred to the
  lowest group occur along the shore at Dunoon, and are followed by the
  Beinn Bheula grits and albite schists, forming nearly all the highest
  ground in Cowall between Loch Fyne and the Firth of Clyde and the
  greater part of Kintyre. The green beds, Glensluan mica-schists and
  Loch Tay limestones are developed in Glendaruel, and have been traced
  north-east to Glen Fyne and at intervals south-west to Campbeltown.
  The next prominent zone is that of the Ardrishaig phyllites, with
  quartzites in the lower portion and soft phyllites in the upper part,
  which cover a belt from 3 to 6 m. across, stretching from Glen Shira
  by Inveraray and Ardrishaig to south Knapdale.

  Next in order come the Easdale slates, phyllites with thin dark
  limestone, the main limestone of Loch Awe and the pebbly quartzite
  (Schiehallion), which are repeated by innumerable folds and spread
  northwards to Loch Linnhe and westwards to Jura and Islay. The slates
  of this horizon have been largely quarried at Easdale and
  Ballachulish, and this main limestone is typically developed near Loch
  Awe, near Kilmartin, on the islands of Lismore and Shuna, and in Islay
  between Bridgend and Portaskaig. The quartzites of this series form
  the highest hills in the south of Islay, occupy nearly the whole of
  Jura, and are continued in the mainland, where, by means of the rapid
  isoclinal folding, they form lenticular masses. In Islay and at
  various localities on the mainland a conglomerate occurs at or near
  the base of the quartzites, which contains fragments of the underlying
  rocks and boulders of granite not now found in place in that region.

  On the mainland, on the north side of the compound synclinal folding
  of Loch Awe, the Ardrishaig phyllites reappear at Craignish near
  Kilmartin, and the quartzites of this group are supposed to come to
  the surface again in Glencoe, not far from the outcrop of the
  Schiehallion quartzite.

  The metamorphic rocks are associated with bands of epidiorite which
  have shared in the folding and metamorphism of the region. These are
  largely developed near Loch Awe, in Knapdale, and on the south-east
  coast of Islay. They have been usually regarded as intrusive, but
  south of Tayvallich on the mainland, lavas and tuffs, which have
  escaped deformation, occur in the Easdale slates and the pebbly
  limestone.

  The Lower Old Red Sandstone, chiefly composed of volcanic rocks--lavas
  and tuffs--rests unconformably on the metamorphic series. These rocks
  cover a wide area in Lorne between Loch Melfort, Oban and the Pass of
  Brander, and they reappear in the lofty mountains on both sides of
  Glencoe. Representatives of this formation are found in Kintyre, south
  of Campbeltown, where the sediments prevail. The intrusive igneous
  rocks belonging to this period are widely distributed and form
  conspicuous features. The plutonic masses are represented by the
  granite of Ben Cruachan, by the diorite of Gleann Domhainn, and by the
  kentallenite (a basic rock related to the monxonites), near
  Ballachulish. Throughout the Lorne volcanic plateau there are numerous
  dykes of porphyrite which likewise traverse the schists and part of
  the Ben Cruachan granite. Sheets of quartz-porphyry, lamprophyre and
  diorite are also represented, the first of these types being quarried
  at Crarae on the north shore of Loch Fyne.

  The Upper Old Red Sandstone forms isolated patches resting
  unconformably on all older rocks, on the west coast of Kintyre, and
  between Campbeltown and Southend. In the district of Campbeltown these
  red sandstones and cornstones are followed by the volcanic rocks of
  the Calciferous Sandstone series, which lie to the south of the
  depression at Machrihanish, and are succeeded by the lower limestones
  and coals of the Carboniferous Limestone series.

  On the north and south shores of the promontory of Ardnamurchan there
  are small patches of Jurassic strata ranging from the Lower Lias to
  the Oxford Clay, and in Morvern on the shores of Loch Aline
  representatives of the Upper Greensand are covered by the basaltic
  lavas of Tertiary age. The acid and basic plutonic rocks (gabbros and
  granophyres) of Tertiary time occur in Ardnamurchan. A striking
  geological feature of the county is the number of dolerite and basalt
  dykes trending in a north-west direction, which are referred to the
  same period of intrusion. There is, however, another group of dolerite
  dykes running east and west near Dunoon and elsewhere, which are cut
  by the former and are probably of older date.

  Lead veins occur at Strontian which have yielded a number of minerals,
  including sphalerite, fluorite, strontianite, harmotone, brewsterite
  and pilolite. Near Inveraray, nickeliferous ore has been obtained at
  two localities.

_Climate._--The rainfall is very abundant. At Oban, the average annual
amount is 64.18 in.; in Glen Fyne, 104.11 in.; at the bridge of Orchy,
113.62 in., and at Upper Glencoe 127.65. The prevailing winds, as
observed near Crinan, are south-west and south-east, and next in
frequency are the north-west and north-east. The average yearly
temperature is 48° F.

_Agriculture._--Argyllshire was formerly partly covered with natural
forests, remains of which, consisting chiefly of oak, ash, pine and
birch, are still visible in the mosses; but, owing to the clearance of
the ground for the introduction of sheep, and to past neglect of
planting, the county is now remarkable for its lack of wood, except in
the neighbourhood of Inveraray, where there are extensive and
flourishing plantations, and a few other places. Replanting, however,
has been carried on. Most of the county is unfitted for agriculture; but
many districts afford fine pasturage for mountain sheep; and some of the
valleys, such as Glendaruel, are very fertile. The chief crop is oats;
there is a little barley, but no wheat. The shire is one of those where
the crofting system exists, but it is by no means universal. It is
predominant in Tyree and the western district of the mainland, but
elsewhere farms of moderate size are the rule. The cattle, though small,
are equal to any other breed in the kingdom, and are marketed in large
numbers in the south. Dairy farming is carried on to some extent in the
southern parts of Kintyre, where there is a large proportion of arable
land. In the higher tracts sheep have taken the place of cattle with
excellent results. The black-faced is the species most generally reared.

_Industries._--Whisky is manufactured at Campbeltown, in Islay, at Oban,
Ardrishaig and elsewhere. Gunpowder is made at Kames (Kyles of Bute),
Melfort and Furnace. Coarse woollens are made for home use; but fishing
is the most important industry, Loch Fyne being famous for its herrings.
The season lasts from June to January, but white fishing is carried on
at one or other of the ports all the year round. Slate and granite
quarrying and some coal-mining are the only other industries of any
consequence.

_Communications._--Owing partly to the paucity of trading industries and
partly to the fact that, owing to its greatly indented coast-line, no
place in the shire is more than 12 m. from the sea, the railway mileage
in the county is very small. The Tyndrum to Oban section of the
Caledonian railway company's system is within the county limits; a small
portion of the track of the North British railway company's line to
Mallaig skirts the extreme west of the shire, and the Caledonian line
from Oban to Ballachulish serves the northern coast districts of the
Argyllshire mainland. In connexion with this last route mention should
be made of the cantilever bridge crossing the Falls of Lora with a span
of 500 ft. at a height of 125 ft. above the water-way. The chief means
of communication is by steamers, which maintain regular intercourse
between Glasgow and various parts of the coast. In order to avoid the
circuitous passage round the Mull of Kintyre the Crinan Canal, across
the isthmus from Ardrishaig to Loch Crinan, a distance of 9 m., was
constructed in 1793-1801, at a cost of £142,000. It has 15 locks, an
average depth of 10 ft., a surface width of 66 ft., and bottom width of
30 ft., is navigable by vessels of 200 tons, and runs through a district
of remarkable beauty. Another canal unites Campbeltown with Dalavaddy.
In summer the mails for the islands and the great bulk of the tourist
traffic by the MacBrayne fleet is conveyed through the Crinan Canal,
transhipment being effected at Ardrishaig and Crinan. Throughout the
year goods traffic between the Clyde and elsewhere and the West Highland
ports is conveyed by deep-sea steamers round the Mull. Before the advent
of railways the shire contained many famous coaching routes, but now
coaches only run during the tourist season, either in connexion with
train and steamer, or in districts still not served by either.

_Population and Government._--Owing to emigration, chiefly to Canada,
the population has declined, almost without a break, since 1831, when it
was 100,973, to 74,085 in 1891 and 73,642 in 1901, in which year there
were 24 persons to the sq. m. In 1901 the number of Gaelic-speaking
persons was 34,224, of whom 3313 spoke Gaelic only. The chief towns are
Campbeltown (population in 1901, 8286), Dunoon (6779) and Oban (5427),
with Ardrishaig (1285), Ballachulish (1143), Lochgilphead (1313) and
Tarbert (1697). The county returns a member to parliament. Inveraray,
Campbeltown and Oban belong to the Ayr district group of parliamentary
burghs. Argyllshire is a sheriffdom, and there are resident
sheriffs-substitute at Inveraray, Campbeltown and Oban; courts are held
also at Tobermory, Lochgilphead, Bowmore in Islay, and Dunoon. Both
Presbyterian bodies are strongly represented; there are Roman Catholic
and (Anglican) Episcopal bishops of Argyll and the Isles, and there is a
Roman Catholic pro-cathedral at Oban. Campbeltown, Dunoon and Oban have
secondary schools, Tarbert public school has a secondary department, and
several other schools earn grants for giving higher education. Part of
the "residue" grant is spent by the county council on classes of
navigation and other subjects in various schools, short courses in
agriculture for farmers, and in providing bursaries.

_History._--The early history of Argyll (Airergaidheal) is very obscure.
At the close of the 5th century Fergus, son of Erc, a descendant of
Conor II., _airdrigh_ or high king of Ireland, came over with a band of
Irish Scots and established himself in Argyll and Kintyre. Nothing more
is known till, in the days of Conall I., the descendant of Fergus in the
fourth generation, St Columba appears. Conall died in 574, and Columba
was mainly instrumental in establishing his first cousin, Aidan, founder
of the Dalriad kingdom and ancestor of the royal house of Scotland, in
power. In the 8th century Argyll, with the Western Islands and Man, fell
under the power of the Norsemen until, in the 12th century, Somerled (or
Somhairle), a descendant of Colla-Uais, _airdrigh_ of Ireland (327-331),
succeeded in ousting them and established his authority, not only as
thane of Argyll, but also in Kintyre and the Western Islands. Somerled
died in 1164 and his descendants maintained themselves in Argyll and the
islands, between the conflicting claims of the kings of Scotland, Norway
and Man, until the end of the 15th century.

Up to 1222 Argyll had formed an independent Celtic princedom; but in
that year it was reduced by Alexander II., the Scottish king, to a
sheriffdom, and was henceforth regarded as an integral part of Scotland.
Among the various clans in Argyll, the Campbells of Loch Awe, a branch
of the clan McArthur, now began to come to the fore, though the mainland
was still chiefly in the possession of the MacDougals. The position of
the lords of the house of Somerled was now curious, since they were
feudatories of the king of Norway for the isles and of the king of
Scotland for Argyll. Their policy in the wars between the two powers was
a masterly neutrality. Thus, during the expedition of Alexander II. to
the Western Isles in 1249, Ewan (Eoghan), lord of Argyll, refused to
fight against the Norwegians; in 1263 the same Ewan refused to join
Haakon of Norway in attacking Alexander III. Forty years later the
clansmen of Argyll, mainly MacDougals, were warring on the side of
Edward of England against Robert Bruce, by whom they were badly beaten
on Loch Awe in 1309. The clansmen of the house of Somerled in the isles,
on the other hand, the MacDonalds, remained loyal to Scotland in spite
of the persuasions of John of Argyll, appointed admiral of Edward II.'s
western fleet; and, under their chief Angus Og, they contributed much to
the victory of Bannockburn. The alliance of John, earl of Ross and lord
of the Isles, with Edward IV. of England in 1461 led to the breaking of
the power of the house of Somerled, and in 1478 John was forced to
resign Ross to the crown and, two years later, his lordships of Knapdale
and Kintyre as well. In Argyll itself the Campbells had already made the
first step to supremacy through the marriage of Colin, grandson of Sir
Duncan Campbell of Lochow, first Lord Campbell, with Isabel Stewart,
eldest of the three co-heiresses of John, third lord of Lorne. He
acquired the greater part of the lands of the other sisters by purchase,
and the lordship of Lorne from Walter their uncle, the heir in tail
male, by an exchange for lands in Perthshire. In 1457 he was created, by
James II., earl of Argyll. He died on the 10th of May 1493. From him
dates the greatness of the house of the earls and dukes of Argyll
(q.v.), whose history belongs to that of Scotland. The house of Somerled
survives in two main branches--that of Macdonald of the Isles, Alexander
Macdonald (d. 1795) having been raised to the peerage in 1776, and that
of the Macdonnells, earls of Antrim in Ireland. The principal clans in
Argyll, besides those already mentioned, were the Macleans, the Stewarts
of Appin, the Macquarries and the Macdonalds of Glencoe, and the
Macfarlanes of Glencroe. The Campbells are still very numerous in the
county.

Argyllshire men have made few contributions to English literature. For
long the natives spoke Gaelic only and their bards sang in Gaelic (see
CELT: _Literature:_ Scottish). Near Inistrynich on the north-eastern
shore of Loch Awe stands the monumental cairn erected in honour of
Duncan Ban McIntyre (1724-1812), the most popular of modern Gaelic
bards. But the romantic beauty of the country has made it a favourite
setting for the themes of many poets and story-tellers, from "Ossian"
and Sir Walter Scott to Robert Louis Stevenson, while not a few men
distinguished in affairs or in learning have been natives of the county.

The antiquities comprise monoliths, circles of standing stones, crannogs
and cairns. In almost all the burying-grounds--as at Campbeltown, Keil,
Soroby, Kilchousland, Kilmun--there are specimens of sculptured crosses
and slabs. Besides the famous ecclesiastical remains at Iona (q.v.),
there are ruins of a Cistercian priory in Oronsay, and of a church
founded in the 12th century by Somerled, thane of Argyll, at Saddell.
Among castles may be mentioned Dunstaffnage, Ardtornish, Skipness,
Kilchurn (beloved of painters), Ardchonnel, Dunolly, Stalker, Dunderaw
and Carrick.

  AUTHORITIES.--The (Eighth) Duke of Argyll, _Commercial Principles
  Applied to the Hire of Land_ (London, 1877); _Crofts and Farms in the
  Hebrides_ (Edinburgh, 1883); _Iona_ (Edinburgh, 1889); _Scotland as it
  Was and Is_ (Edinburgh, 1887), _House of Argyll_ (Glasgow, 1871); A.
  Brown, _Memorials of Argyllshire_ (Greenock, 1889); Harvie-Brown and
  Buckley, _Vertebrate Fauna of Argyll and the Inner Hebrides_
  (Edinburgh, 1892); D. Clerk, "On the Agriculture of the County of
  Argyll" (_Trans. of H. and A. Soc._, 1878); T. Gray, _Week at Oban_
  (Edinburgh, 1881); Stewart, _Collection of Views of Campbeltown_. For
  antiquities see _The Sculptured Stones of Scotland_, vol. ii.,
  published by the Spalding Club, and Capt. T.P. White's
  _Archaeological Sketches in Kintyre_ and _Proc. Antiq. Soc. of
  Scotland_, vols. iv., v., viii.