ARGYLL, EARLS AND DUKES OF. The rise of this family of Scottish peers,
originally the Campbells of Lochow, and first ennobled as Barons
Campbell, is referred to in the article ARGYLLSHIRE.

ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, 5th earl of Argyll (1530-1573), was the elder son of
Archibald, 4th earl of Argyll (d. 1558), and a grandson of Colin, the
3rd earl (d. 1530). His great-grandfather was the 2nd earl, Archibald,
who was killed at Flodden in 1513, and this nobleman's father was Colin,
Lord Campbell (d. 1493), the founder of the greatness of the Campbell
family, who was created earl of Argyll in 1457. With Lord James Stuart,
afterwards the regent Murray, the 5th earl of Argyll became an adherent
of John Knox about 1556, and like his father was one of the most
influential members of the party of religious reform, signing what was
probably the first "godly band" in December 1557. As one of the "lords
of the congregation" he was one of James Stuart's principal lieutenants
during the warfare between the reformers and the regent, Mary of
Lorraine; and later with Murray he advised and supported Mary queen of
Scots, who regarded him with great favour. It was about this time that
William Cecil, afterwards Lord Burghley, referred to Argyll as "a goodly
gentleman universally honoured of all Scotland." Owing to his friendship
with Mary, Argyll was separated from the party of Knox, but he forsook
the queen when she determined to marry Lord Darnley; he was, however,
again on Mary's side after Queen Elizabeth's refusal to aid Murray in
1565. Argyll was probably an accomplice in the murder of Rizzio; he was
certainly a consenting party to that of Darnley, and then separating
himself from Murray he commanded Mary's soldiers after her escape from
Lochleven, and by his want of courage and resolution was partly
responsible for her defeat at Langside in May 1568. Soon afterwards he
made his peace with Murray, but it is possible that he was accessory to
the regent's murder in 1570. After this event Argyll became lord high
chancellor of Scotland, and he died on the 12th of September 1573. His
first wife was an illegitimate daughter of James V., and he was thus
half-brother-in-law to Mary and to Murray. His relations with her were
not harmonious; he was accused of adultery, and in 1568 he performed a
public penance at Stirling.

He left no children, and on his death his half-brother Colin (d. 1584)
became 6th earl of Argyll. This nobleman, whose life was partly spent in
feuds with the regent Morton, died in October 1584. He was succeeded as
7th earl by his young son Archibald (1576-1638), who became a Roman
Catholic, fought for Philip III. of Spain in Flanders, whither he had
gone to avoid his creditors, and, having entrusted the care of his
estates to his son, died in London.

ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, 1st marquess and 8th earl of Argyll (1607-1661),
eldest son of Archibald, 7th earl, by his first wife, Lady Anne Douglas,
daughter of William, 1st earl of Morton, was born in 1607[1] and
educated at St Andrews University, where he matriculated on the 15th of
January 1622. He had early in life, as Lord Lorne, been entrusted with
the possession of the Argyll estates when his father renounced
Protestantism and took service with Philip of Spain; and he exercised
over his clan an authority almost absolute, disposing of a force of
20,000 retainers, and being, according to Baillie, "by far the most
powerful subject in the kingdom." On the outbreak of the religious
dispute between the king and Scotland in 1637 his support was eagerly
desired by Charles I. He had been made a privy councillor in 1628, and
in 1638 the king summoned him, together with Traquair and Roxburgh, to
London; but he refused to be won over, openly and courageously warned
Charles against his despotic ecclesiastical policy, and showed great
hostility towards Laud. In consequence a secret commission was given to
the earl of Antrim to invade Argyllshire and stir up the Macdonalds
against the Campbells, a wild and foolish project which completely
miscarried. Argyll, who inherited the title by the death of his father
in 1638, had originally no preference for Presbyterianism, but now
definitely took the side of the Covenanters in defence of the national
religion and liberties. He continued to attend the meetings of the
Assembly after its dissolution by the marquess of Hamilton, when
Episcopacy was abolished. In 1639 he sent a statement to Laud, and
subsequently to the king, defending the Assembly's action; and raising a
body of troops he seized Hamilton's castle of Brodick in Arran. After
the pacification of Berwick he carried a motion, in opposition to
Montrose, by which the estates secured to themselves the election of the
lords of the articles, who had formerly been nominated by the king, a
fundamental change in the Scottish constitution, whereby the management
of public affairs was entrusted to a representative body and withdrawn
from the control of the crown. An attempt by the king to deprive him of
his office as justiciary of Argyll and Tarbet failed, and on the
prorogation of the parliament by Charles, in May 1640, Argyll moved that
it should continue its sittings and that the government and safety of
the kingdom should be secured by a committee of the estates, of which,
though not a member, he was himself the guiding spirit. In June he was
entrusted with a "commission of fire and sword" against the royalists in
Atholl and Angus, which, after succeeding in entrapping the earl of
Atholl, he carried out with completeness and some cruelty. It was on
this occasion that took place the burning of "the bonnie house of
Airlie." By this time the personal rivalry and difference in opinion
between Montrose and Argyll had led to an open breach. The former
arranged that on the occasion of Charles's approaching visit to
Scotland, Argyll should be accused of high treason in the parliament.
The plot, however, was disclosed, and Montrose with others was
imprisoned. Accordingly when the king arrived he found himself deprived
of every remnant of influence and authority. It only remained for
Charles to make a series of concessions. He transferred the control over
judicial and political appointments to the parliament, created Argyll a
marquess (1641) with a pension of £1000 a year, and returned home,
having in Clarendon's words "made a perfect deed of gift of that
kingdom." Meanwhile the king's policy of peace and concession had, as
usual, been rudely and treacherously interrupted by a resort to force,
an unsuccessful attempt, known as the "incident," being made to kidnap
Argyll, Hamilton and Lanark. Argyll was mainly instrumental at this
crisis in keeping the national party faithful to what was to him
evidently the common cause, and in accomplishing the alliance with the
Long Parliament in 1643. In January 1644 he accompanied the Scottish
army into England as a member of the committee of both kingdoms and in
command of a troop of horse, but was soon in March compelled to return
to suppress royalist movements in the north and to defend his own
territories. He compelled Huntly to retreat in April, and in July
advanced to meet the Irish troops now landed in Argyllshire, which were
acting in conjunction with Montrose, who had put himself at the head of
the royalist forces in Scotland. A campaign followed in the north in
which neither general succeeded in obtaining any advantage over the
other, or even in engaging battle. Argyll then returned to Edinburgh,
threw up his commission, and retired to Inveraray Castle. Thither
Montrose unexpectedly followed him in December, compelled him to flee to
Roseneath, and devastated his territories. On the 2nd of February 1645,
when following Montrose northwards, Argyll was surprised by him at
Inverlochy and witnessed from his barge on the lake, to which he had
retired owing to a dislocated arm, a fearful slaughter of his troops,
which included 1500 of the Campbells. He arrived at Edinburgh on the
12th of February and was again present at Montrose's further great
victory on the 15th of August at Kilsyth, whence he escaped to
Newcastle. Argyll was at last delivered from his formidable antagonist
by Montrose's final defeat at Philiphaugh on the 12th of September. In
1646 he was sent to negotiate with the king at Newcastle after his
surrender to the Scottish army, when he endeavoured to moderate the
demands of the parliament and at the same time to persuaade the king to
accept them. On the 7th of July 1646 he was appointed a member of the
Assembly of Divines.

Up to this point the statesmanship of Argyll had been highly successful.
The national liberties and religion of Scotland had been defended and
guaranteed, and the power of the king in Scotland reduced to a mere
shadow. In addition, these privileges had been still further secured by
the alliance with the English opposition, and by the subsequent triumph
of the parliament and Presbyterianism in the neighbouring kingdom. The
sovereign himself, after vainly contending in arms, was a prisoner in
their midst. But Argyll's influence could not survive the rupture of the
alliance between the two nations on which his whole policy was
constructed. He opposed in vain the secret treaty now concluded between
the king and the Scots against the parliament, and while Hamilton
marched into England and was defeated by Cromwell at Preston, Argyll,
after a narrow escape from a surprise at Stirling, joined the
Whiggamores, a body of Covenanters at Edinburgh; and, supported by
London, Leven and Leslie, he established a new government, which
welcomed Cromwell on his arrival there on the 4th of October. This
alliance, however, was at once destroyed by the execution of Charles I.,
which excited universal horror in Scotland. In the series of tangled
incidents which followed, Argyll lost control of the national policy. He
describes himself at this period as "a distracted man ... in a
distracted time" whose "remedies ... had the quite contrary operation."
He supported the invitation from the Covenanters to Charles II. to land
in Scotland, gazed upon the captured Montrose, bound on a cart on his
way to execution at Edinburgh, and subsequently, when Charles II. came
to Scotland, having signed the Covenant and repudiated Montrose, Argyll
remained at the head of the administration. After the defeat of Dunbar,
Charles retained his support by the promise of a dukedom and the Garter,
and an attempt was made by Argyll to marry the king to his daughter. On
the 1st of January 1651 he placed the crown on Charles's head at Scone.
But his power had now passed to the Hamilton party. He strongly opposed,
but was unable to prevent, the expedition into England, and in the
subsequent reduction of Scotland, after having held out in Inveraray
Castle for nearly a year, was at last surprised in August 1652 and
submitted to the Commonwealth. His ruin was then complete. His policy
had failed, his power had vanished. In his estate he was hopelessly in
debt, and on terms of such violent hostility with his eldest son as to
be obliged to demand a garrison in his house for his protection. During
his visit to Monk at Dalkeith in 1654 to complain of this, he was
subjected to much personal insult from his creditors, and on visiting
London in September 1655 to obtain money due to him from the Scottish
parliament, he was arrested for debt, though soon liberated. In Richard
Cromwell's parliament of 1659 Argyll sat as member for Aberdeenshire. At
the Restoration he presented himself at Whitehall, but was at once
arrested by order of Charles and placed in the Tower (1660), being sent
to Edinburgh to stand his trial for high treason. He was acquitted of
complicity in the death of Charles I., and his escape from the whole
charge seemed imminent, but the arrival of a packet of letters written
by Argyll to Monk showed conclusively his collaboration with Cromwell's
government, particularly in the suppression of Glencairn's royalist
rising in 1652. He was immediately sentenced to death, his execution by
beheading taking place on the 27th of May 1661, before even the death
warrant had been signed by the king. His head was placed on the same
spike upon the west end of the Tolbooth on which that of Montrose had
previously been exposed, and his body was buried at the Holy Loch, where
the head was also deposited in 1664. A monument was erected to his
memory in St Giles's church in Edinburgh in 1895.

While imprisoned in the Tower he wrote _Instructions to a Son_ (1661;
reprinted in 1689 and 1743). Some of his speeches, including the one
delivered on the scaffold, were published and are printed in the
_Harleian Miscellany_. He married Lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of
William, 2nd earl of Morton, and had two sons and four daughters.

  See also the _Life and Times of Archibald Marquis of Argyll_ (1903),
  by John Willcock, who prints for the first time the six incriminating
  letters to Monk; _Eng. Hist. Review_, xviii. 369 and 624; _Scottish
  History Society_, vol. xvii. (1894); _Charles II. and Scotland in
  1650_, ed. by S.R. Gardiner, and vol. xviii. (1895); _History of
  Scotland_, by A. Lang, vol. iii. (1904).

ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, 9th earl of Argyll (1629-1685), eldest son of the
8th earl, studied abroad, and at the age of thirteen was appointed
captain in the Scottish regiment serving in France under his uncle the
earl of Irvine. He returned home at the close of 1649, and was made
captain of Charles II.'s life guards on the king's arrival in Scotland
in 1650. He declared himself a royalist in opposition to his father,
with the view, as some said, of securing the family estates in any
event. He fought at Dunbar on the 3rd of September 1650, and after the
battle of Worcester joined Glencairn in the Highlands. Bitter disputes
arose, and on the 2nd of January 1654 Lorne, quitting his troops, fled
to avoid arrest. In 1653 he submitted to Monk. He appears, however, to
have maintained communications with Charles, and on his refusal to take
the oath renouncing allegiance to the Stuarts in 1657 he was imprisoned,
remaining in confinement probably till a short time before the
Restoration. He was then well received at court by Charles II. After the
execution of his father, he endeavoured to obtain the restitution of his
forfeited estates and title, but having incautiously attacked certain
members of the government in letters which were made public, he was
indicted at Edinburgh on the capital charge of "leasing-making" and was
sentenced to death on the 26th of August. He remained a prisoner in
Edinburgh Castle till the 4th of June 1663, when the sentence was
cancelled and he was re-created earl and restored to his estates. He
disapproved of the severities practised upon the Covenanters in the
west, and in 1671 pleaded for milder methods. His staunch Protestantism
rendered him exceedingly obnoxious to James, duke of York, who in 1680
arrived as high commissioner in Scotland and at once expressed his
jealousy of Argyll's immense territorial influence. Argyll moved the
re-enactment of "all the acts against popery" omitted on James's
account, and opposed the exemption of the royal family from the test,
though allowing it in the case of James. In signing the test himself, in
its final form both ambiguous and self-contradictory, he made the
reservation "so far as consistent with itself and the Protestant faith,"
and declined to engage himself not to promote any alteration of
advantage in church or state. On his refusal to record his oath in
writing and to sign it, he was dismissed from the Scottish privy
council, and on the 9th of November 1681 was accused of treason, a
charge which Halifax declared openly in England "they would not hang a
dog upon." A trial followed, a scandalous exhibition of illegality and
injustice, at the close of which Argyll was sentenced to death and to
the forfeiture of his estates. Shortly afterwards, through the
instrumentality of his step-daughter, Sophia Lindsay, he succeeded in
making his escape, and after some adventures retired to Holland. His
subsequent movements are uncertain, but he appears to have again
visited London, and was in correspondence with the Rye House plotters
and proposing to head a rebellion in Scotland in 1683. In 1685 he joined
the conspiracy in Holland to set Monmouth on the throne instead of James
II., arriving in Orkney on the 6th of May and making his way to his own
country. But his clansmen refused to join him, and whatever small
chances of success remained were destroyed by constant and paralysing
disputes. His ships and ammunition were captured, and after some aimless
wanderings he found himself deserted, with but one companion, Major
Fullerton. On the 18th of June he was taken prisoner at Inchinnan and
arrived at Edinburgh on the 20th, where he was paraded through the
streets and put in irons in the castle. James ordered his summary
execution on the 29th, and it was carried out by beheading on the
following day, on the old charge of 1681. His head was exposed on the
west side of the Tollbooth, where his father's and Montrose's had also
been exhibited, his body finding its final place of burial at Inveraray.

By his first wife, Lady Mary Stewart, daughter of the 4th earl of Moray
(Murray), he had four sons and three daughters.

  See _Argyll Papers_ (1834); _Letters from Archibald, 9th Earl of
  Argyle, to the Duke of Lauderdale_ (1829); _Hist. MSS. Comm_. vi. Rep.
  606; _Life of Mr Donald Cargile_, by P. Walker, pp. 45 et seq.; _The
  3rd Part of the Protestant Plot ... and a Brief Account of the Case of
  the Earl of Argyle_ (1682); Sir George MacKenzie's _Hist. of
  Scotland_, p. 70; and J. Willcock, _A Scots Earl in Covenanting Times_
  (1908).

ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, 1st duke of Argyll (?1651-1703), was the eldest son
of the 9th earl. He tried to get his father's attainder reversed by
seeking the king's favour, but being unsuccessful he went over to the
Hague and joined William of Orange as an active promoter of the
revolution of 1688. In spite of the attainder, he was admitted in 1689
to the convention of the Scottish estates as earl of Argyll, and he was
deputed, with Sir James Montgomery and Sir John Dalrymple, to present
the crown to William III. in its name, and to tender him the coronation
oath. In 1690 an act was passed restoring his title and estates, and it
was in connexion with the refusal of the Macdonalds of Glencoe to join
in the submission to him that he organized the terrible massacre which
has made his name notorious. In 1696 he was made a lord of the treasury,
and his political services were rewarded in 1701 by his being created
duke of Argyll. He had two sons by his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
Lionel Talmash, John (the 2nd duke) and Archibald (the 3rd duke.)

JOHN CAMPBELL, 2nd duke of Argyll and duke of Greenwich (1678-1743), was
born on the 10th of October 1678. He entered the army in 1694, and in
1701 was promoted to the command of a regiment. On the death of his
father in 1703, he was appointed a member of the privy council, and at
the same time colonel of the Scotch horse guards, and one of the
extraordinary lords of session. In return for his services in promoting
the Union, he was created (1705) a peer of England, by the titles of
baron of Chatham and earl of Greenwich, and in 1710 was made a knight of
the Garter. He first distinguished himself in a military capacity at the
battle of Oudenarde (1708), where he served as a brigadier-general; and
was afterwards present under the duke of Marlborough at the sieges of
Lille, Ghent, Bruges and Tournay, and did remarkable service at the
battle of Malplaquet in 1709. He was very popular with the troops, and
his rivalry with Marlborough on this account is thought to have been the
cause of the enmity shown by Argyll afterwards to his old commander. In
1711 he was sent to take command in Spain; but being seized with a
violent fever at Barcelona, and disappointed of supplies from home, he
returned to England. Having a seat in the House of Lords, and being
gifted with an extraordinary power of oratory, he censured the measures
of the ministry with such freedom that all his places were disposed of
to other noblemen; but at the accession of George I. he recovered his
influence. On the breaking out of the rebellion in 1715 he was appointed
commander-in-chief of the forces in North Britain, and was principally
instrumental in effecting the total extinction of the rebellion in
Scotland without much bloodshed. He arrived in London early in March
1716, and at first stood high in the favour of the king, but in a few
months was strippee of his offices. This disgrace, however, did not
deter him from the discharge of his parliamentary duties; he supported
the bill for the impeachment of Bishop Atterbury, and lent his aid to
his countrymen by opposing the bill for punishing the city of Edinburgh
for the Porteous riot. In the beginning of the year 1719 he was again
admitted into favour, appointed lord steward of the household, and, in
April following, created duke of Greenwich; he held various offices in
succession, and in 1735 was made a field marshall. He continued in the
administration till after the accession of George II., when, in April
1740, a violent speech against the government led again to his dismissal
from office. He was soon restored on a change of the ministry, but
disapproving the measures of the new administration, and apparently
disappointed at not being given the command of the army, he shortly
resigned all his posts, and spent the rest of his life in privacy and
retirement. He died on the 4th of October 1743. A monument by Roubillac
was erected to his memory in Westminster Abbey. He was twice married,
and by his second wife, Jane Warburton, had five daughters; his Scottish
titles passed to his brother, but his English titles became extinct, and
though his eldest daughter was created baroness of Greenwich in 1767
this title also became extinct on her death in 1794.

ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, 3rd duke of Argyll (1682-1761), was born at Ham
House in Surrey, in June 1682. On his father being created a duke, he
joined the army, and served for a short time under the duke of
Marlborough. In 1705 he was appointed treasurer of Scotland, and in the
following year was one of the commissioners for treating of the Union;
on the consummation of which, having been raised to the peerage of
Scotland as earl of Islay, he was chosen one of the sixteen peers for
Scotland in the first parliament of Great Britain. In 1711 he was called
to the privy council, and commanded the royal army at the battle of
Sheriffmuir in 1715. he was appointed keeper of the privy seal in 1721,
and was afterwards entrusted with the principal management of Scottish
affairs to an extent which caused him to be called "king of Scotland."
In 1733 he was made keeper of the great seal, an office which he held
till his death. He succeeded to the dukedom in 1743. Both as earl of
Islay and as duke of Argyll he was prominently connected (with Duncan
Forbes of Culloden) with the movement for consolidating Scottish loyalty
by the formation of locally recruited highland regiments. The duke was
eminent not only for his political abilities, but also for his literary
accomplishments, and he collected one of the most valuable private
libraries in Great Britain. He died suddenly on the 15th of April 1761.
He was married but had no legitimate issue, and his English property was
left to a Mrs Williams, by whom he had a son, William Campbell.

The succession now passed to the descendants of the younger son of the
9th earl, the Campbells of Mamore; the 4th duke died in 1770, and was
succeeded by his son JOHN, the 5th duke (1723-1806) He was a soldier who
had fought at Dettingen and Culloden, and became colonel of the 42nd
regiment (Black Watch), and eventually a field marshall. He sat in the
House of Commons for Glasgow from 1744 to 1761, when on his father's
succession to the dukedom he became legally disqualified, as courtesy
marquess of Lorne, for a Scottish constituency; he could sit, however,
for an English one, and was returned for Dover, which he represented
till 1766, when he was created an English peer as Baron Sundridge, the
title by which till 1892 the dukes of Argyll sat in the House of Lords.
The 5th duke was an active landlord, and was the first president of the
Highland and Agricultural Society. In 1759 he had married the widowed
duchess of Hamilton (the beautiful Elizabeth Gunning), by whom he had
two sons and two daughters. The eldest of his sons, GEORGE (d. 1841),
became 6th duke, and on his death was succeeded as 7th duke by his
brother JOHN (1777-1847), who from 1799-1822 sat in parliament as member
for Argyllshire. He was thrice married, and by his second wife, Joan
Glassell (d. 1828), had two sons, the eldest of whom (b. 1821) died in
1837, and two daughters, the second of whom died in infancy.

GEORGE JOHN DOUGLAS CAMPBELL, 8th duke (1823-1900), the second son of
the 7th duke, was born on the 30th of April 1823, and succeeded his
father in April 1847. He had already obtained notice as a writer of
pamphlets on the disruption of the Church of Scotland, which he strove
to avert, and he rapidly became prominent on the Liberal side in
parliamentary politics. He was a frequent and eloquent speaker in the
House of Lords, and sat as lord privy seal (1852) and postmaster-general
(1855) in the cabinets of Lord Aberdeen and Lord Palmerston. In Mr
Gladstone's cabinet of 1868 he was secretary of state for India, and
somewhat infelicitously signalized his term of office by his refusal,
against the advice of the Indian government, to promise the amir of
Afghanistan support against Russian aggression, a course which threw
that ruler into the arms of Russia and was followed by the second Afghan
War. His eminence alike as a great Scottish noble, and as a British
statesman, was accentuated in 1871 when his son, the marquess of Lorne,
married Princess Louise, the fourth daughter of Queen Victoria; but in
the political world few memorable acts on his part call for record
except his resignation of the office of lord privy seal, which he held
in Mr Gladstone's administration of 1880, from his inability to assent
to the Irish land legislation of 1881. He opposed the Home Rule Bill
with equal vigour, though Mr Gladstone subsequently stated that, among
all the old colleagues who dissented from his course, the duke was the
only one whose personal relations with him remained entirely unchanged.
Detached from party, the duke took an independent position, and for many
years spoke his mind with great freedom in letters to _The Times_ on
public questions, especially such as concerned the rights or interests
of landowners. He was no less active on scientific questions in their
relation to religion, which he earnestly strove to reconcile with the
progress of discovery. With this aim he published _The Reign of Law_
(1866), _Primeval Man_ (1869), _The Unity of Nature_ (1884), _The Unseen
Foundations of Society_ (1893), and other essays. He also wrote on the
Eastern question, with especial reference to India, the history and
antiquities of Iona, patronage in the Church of Scotland, and many other
subjects. The duke (to whose Scottish title was added a dukedom of the
United Kingdom in 1892) died on the 24th of April 1900. He was thrice
married: first (1844) to a daughter of the second duke of Sutherland (d.
1878); secondly (1881) to a daughter of Bishop Claughton of St Albans
(d. 1894); and thirdly (1895) to Ina Erskine M'Neill. Few men of the
duke's era displayed more versatility of intellect, and he was
remarkable among the men of his time for his lofty eloquence.

He was succeeded as 9th duke by his eldest son JOHN DOUGLAS SUTHERLAND
CAMPBELL (1845- ), whose marriage in 1871 to H.R.H. Princess Louise gave
him a special prominence in English public life. He was governor-general
of Canada from 1878 to 1883; member of parliament for South Manchester,
in the Unionist interest, 1895 to 1900; and he also became known as a
writer both in prose and verse. In 1907 he published his reminiscences,
_Pages from the Past_.

  See the _Autobiography and Memoirs_ of the 8th duke, edited by his
  widow (1906), which is full of interesting historical and personal
  detail.     (P. C. Y.; H. Ch.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The date of 1598, previously accepted, is shown by Willcock to be
    incorrect.