ARIA (Ital. for "air"), a musical term, equivalent to the English "air,"
signifying a melody apart from the harmony, but especially a musical
composition for a single voice or instrument, with an accompaniment of
other voices or instruments.

The aria originally developed from the expansion of a single vocal
melody, generally on the lines of what is known as binary form (see
SONATA and SONATA FORMS). Accordingly, while the germs of aria form may
be traceable in the highest developments of folk-song, the aria as a
definite art-form could not exist before the middle of the 17th century;
because up to that time the whole organization of music was based upon
polyphonic principles which left no room for the development of melody
for melody's sake. When at the beginning of the 17th century the
Monodists (see HARMONY and MONTEVERDE) inaugurated a new era and showed
in their first experiments the enormous possibilities latent in their
new art of accompanying single voices by instruments, it was natural
that for many years the mere suggestiveness and variety of their
experiments should suffice to retain the attention of contemporary
listeners, without any real artistic coherence in the works as wholes.
But, even at the outset, mere novelty of harmony, however poignant its
emotional expression, was felt by the profounder spirits of the new art
to be an untrustworthy guide to progress. And Monteverde's famous lament
of the deserted Ariadne is one of many early examples that appeal to an
elementary sense of form by making the last phrase identical with the
first. As instrumental music grew, and the modern sense of key became
strong and consistent, composers felt themselves more and more able to
appeal to that sense of harmonically consistent melody which has
asserted itself in folk-music before the history of harmonic music may
be said to have begun. The technique of solo singers grew as rapidly as
that of solo players, and composers soon found their chief musical
interest in doing justice to both. In Sir Hubert Parry's work, _The
Music of the 17th Century (Oxford History of Music_, vol. iii.), will be
found numerous illustrations of the early development of aria forms,
from their first indications in Monteverde's instinctive struggles after
coherence, to their complete maturity in the works of Alessandro
Scarlatti.

By Scarlatti's time it was thoroughly established that the binary form
of melody was that which could best be expanded into a form which should
do justice both to singers and to the players who accompanied them. Thus
the aria became on a small scale the prototype of the Concerto; and
under that heading will accordingly be found all that need be said as to
the relation between the instrumental _ritornello_ and the material of
the voice part in an aria.

So far we have spoken only of the main body of the aria; but the
addition of a middle section with a _da Capo_, which constitutes the
universal 18th-century _da Capo_ form of aria, adds a very simple new
principle to the essential scheme without really modifying it. A typical
aria of the Scarlatti or Handelian type is a very large melody in binary
form, delivered by the voice, which expands it with florid perorations
before each cadence (and sometimes also with florid preludes); while
relief is given to the voice, further spaciousness to the form, and
justice done to the accompaniment, by the addition of an instrumental
ritornello containing the gist of the melody not only at the beginning
and end, but also in suitable shorter forms at the principal
intermediate cadences in foreign keys. A smaller scheme of the same kind
in a new group of related keys, but generally without much new material,
is then appended as a middle section after which follows the main
section _da Capo_. The result is generally a piece of music of
considerable length, in a form which cannot fail to be effective and
coherent; and there is little cause for wonder in the extent to which it
dominated 18th-century music. It was not, however, invariable. In the
_Cavatina_ we find a form too small for the _da Capo_; and in the
oratorios of Handel and the choral works of Bach we find a majority of
arias in a larger form which evades the possibility of exact repetition.

The aria forms are profoundly influenced by the difference between the
Sonata style and the style of Bach and Handel. But the scale of the form
is inevitably small, and in any opera an aria is hardly possible except
in a situation which is a tableau rather than an action. Consequently
there is no such difference between the form of the classical operatic
aria of Mozart and that of the Handelian type as there is between sonata
music and suite music. The scale, however, has become too large for the
_da Capo_, which was in any case too rigid to survive in music designed
to intensify a dramatic situation instead of to distract attention from
it. The necessary change of style was so successfully achieved that,
until Wagner succeeded in devising music that moved absolutely _pari
passu_ with his drama, the aria remained as the central formal principle
in dramatic music; and few things in artistic evolution are more
interesting than the extent to which Mozart's predecessor, the great
dramatic reformer Gluck, profited by the essential resources of his pet
aversion, the aria style, when he had not only purged it of what had
become the stereotyped ideas of ritornellos and vocal flourishes, but
animated it by the new sense of dramatic climax to which the sonata
style appealed.

In modern opera the aria is almost always out of place, and the forms in
which definite melodies nowadays appear are rather those of the song in
its limited sense as that of a poem in formal stanzas all set to the
same music. In other words, a song in a modern opera tends to be
something which would be sung even if the drama had to be performed as a
play without music; whereas a classical aria would in non-musical drama
be a soliloquy. This can be shown by works at such opposite poles of
musical and dramatic technique as Bizet's _Carmen_ and the later works
of Wagner. In _Carmen_ the librettist has so managed that, if his work
were performed as a play, almost the whole of it would have to be sung;
and the one exception of musical importance is the developed soliloquy
of Micaëla in the third act, which, although treated in no old-fashioned
or commonplace spirit by the composer, is the one thing in the opera
which sounds "operatic."

In the later works of Wagner those passages in which we can successfully
detach complete melodies from their context have, one and all,
dramatically the aspect of songs and not of soliloquies. Siegmund sings
the song of Spring to his sister-bride; Mime teaches Siegfried lessons
of gratitude in nursery rhymes; and the whole story of the
_Meistersinger_ is a series of opportunities for song-singing.

The distinctions and gradations between aria and song are of great
aesthetic importance, but their history would carry us too far. The
distinction is obviously of the same importance as that between dramatic
and lyric poetry. Beethoven's _Adelaïde_ is a famous example of what is
called a song when it is really entirely in aria style; while the operas
of Mozart and Weber naturally contain in appropriate situations many
numbers which really are songs. The composers themselves generally give
appropriate names. Thus Mozart, in _Figaro_, calls "Non so piu cosa son"
an aria, because of its free style, though Cherubino actually sings it
as a song he has just invented; while "Voi che sapete," being more
purely lyric, is called _Canzona_.

The term _aria form_ is applied, generally most inaccurately, to all
kinds of slow cantabile instrumental music of which the general design
can be traced to the operatic aria. Mozart, for example, is very fond of
slow movements in large binary form without development, and this is
constantly called aria-form, though the term ought certainly to be
restricted to such examples as have some traits of the aria style, such
as the first slow movement in the great serenade in B flat. At all
events, until writers on music have agreed to give the term some more
accurate use, it is as well to avoid it and its cognate version,
_Lied-form_, altogether in speaking of instrumental music.

The _air_ or _aria_ in a suite is a short binary movement in a flowing
rhythm in common or duple time and by no means of the broadly tunelike
quality which its name would seem to imply.     (D. F. T.)