ARIADNE (in Greek mythology), was the daughter of Minos, king of Crete,
and Pasiphae, the daughter of Helios the Sun-god. When Theseus landed on
the island to slay the Minotaur (q.v.), Ariadne fell in love with him,
and gave him a clue of thread to guide him through the mazes of the
labyrinth. After he had slain the monster, Theseus carried her off, but,
according to Homer (_Odyssey_, xi. 322) she was slain by Artemis at the
request of Dionysus in the island of Dia near Cnossus, before she could
reach Athens with Theseus. In the later legend, she was abandoned, while
asleep on the island of Naxos, by Theseus, who had fallen a victim to
the charms of Aegle (Plutarch, _Theseus_, 20; Diodorus, iv. 60, 61). Her
abandonment and awakening are celebrated in the beautiful _Epithalamium_
of Catullus. On Naxos she is discovered by Dionysus on his return from
India, who is enchanted with her beauty, and marries her when she
awakes. She receives a crown as a bridal gift, which is placed amongst
the stars, while she herself is honoured as a goddess (Ovid, _Metam._
viii. 152, _Fasti_, iii. 459).

The name probably means "very holy" = [Greek: ári-agné]; another
(Cretan) form [Greek: Aridéla] (= [Greek: phanerá])indicates the return
to a "bright" season of nature. Ariadne is the personification of
spring. In keeping with this, her festivals at Naxos present a double
character; the one, full of mourning and sadness, represents her death
or abandonment by Theseus, the other, full of joy and revelry,
celebrates her awakening from sleep and marriage with Dionysus. Thus
nature sleeps and dies during winter, to awake in springtime to a life
of renewed luxuriance. With this may be compared the festivals of Adonis
and Osiris and the myth of Persephone. Theseus himself was said to have
founded a festival at Athens in honour of Ariadne and Dionysus after his
return from Crete. The story of Dionysus and Ariadne was a favourite
subject for reliefs and wall-paintings. Most commonly Ariadne is
represented asleep on the shore at Naxos, while Dionysus, attended by
satyrs and bacchanals, gazes admiringly upon her; sometimes they are
seated side by side under a spreading vine. The scene where she is
holding the clue to Theseus occurs on a very early vase in the British
Museum. There is a statue of the sleeping Ariadne in the Vatican Museum.

  Kanter, _De Ariadne_ (1879); Pallat, _De Fabula Ariadnea_ (1891).