ARIÈGE, an inland department of southern France, bounded S. by Spain, W.
and N. by the department of Haute-Garonne, N.E. and E. by Aude, and S.E.
by Pyrénées-Orientales. It embraces the old countship of Foix, and a
portion of Languedoc and Gascony. Area, 1893 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 205,684.
Ariège is for the most part mountainous. Its southern border is occupied
by the snow-clad peaks of the eastern Pyrenees, the highest of which
within the department is the Pic de Montcalm (10,512 ft.). Communication
with Spain is afforded by a large number of _ports_ or _cols_, which
are, however, for the most part difficult paths, and only practicable
for a few months in the year. Farther to the north two lesser ranges
running parallel to the main chain traverse the centre of the department
from south-east to north-west. The more southerly, the Montagne de Tabe,
contains, at its south-eastern end, several heights between 7200 and
9200 ft., while the Montagues de Plantaurel to the north of Foix are of
lesser altitude. These latter divide the fertile alluvial plains of the
north from the mountains of the centre and south. The department is
intersected by torrents belonging to the Garonne basin--the Salat, the
Arize, which, near Mas d'Azil, flows through a subterranean gallery, the
Ariège and the Hers. The climate is mild in the south, but naturally
very severe among the mountains. Generally speaking, the arable land,
which is chiefly occupied by small holdings, is confined to the
lowlands. Wheat, maize and potatoes are the chief crops. Good vineyards
and market gardens are found in the neighbourhood of Pamiers in the
north. Flax and hemp are also cultivated. The mountains afford excellent
pasture, and a considerable number of cattle, sheep and swine are
reared. Poultry- and bee-farming flourish. Forests cover more than
one-third of the department and harbour wild boars and even bears. Game,
birds of prey and fish are plentiful. There is abundance of minerals,
including lead, copper, manganese and especially iron. Grindstones,
building-stone, talc, gypsum, marble and phosphates are also produced.
Warm mineral springs of note are found at Ax, Aulus and Ussat. Pamiers
and St Girons are the most important industrial towns. Iron founding and
forging, which have their chief centre at Pamiers are principal
industries. Flour-milling, paper-making and cloth-weaving may also be
mentioned. Ariège is served by the Southern railway. It forms the
diocese of Pamiers and belongs to the ecclesiastical province of
Toulouse. It is within the circumscriptions of the académie (educational
division) and of the court of appeal of Toulouse and of the XVII. army
corps. Its capital is Foix; it comprises the arrondissements of Foix, St
Girons and Pamiers, with 20 cantons and 338 communes. Foix, Pamiers, St
Girons and St Lizier-de-Cousérans are the more noteworthy towns. Mention
may also be made of Mirepoix, once the seat of a bishopric, and
possessing a cathedral (15th and 16th centuries) with a remarkable
Gothic spire.