ARIMINUM (mod. _Rimini_), a city of Aemilia, on the N.E. coast of Italy,
69 m. S.E. of Bononia. It was founded by the Umbrians, but in 268 B.C.
became a Roman colony with Latin rights. It was reached from Rome by the
Via Flaminia, constructed in 220 B.C., and from that time onwards was
the bulwark of the Roman power in Cisalpine Gaul, to which province it
even gave its name. Its harbour was of some importance, but is now
silted up, the sea having receded. The remains of its moles were
destroyed in 1807-1809. Ariminum became a place of considerable traffic
owing to the construction of the Via Aemilia (187 B.C.) and the Via
Popilia (132 B.C.), and is frequently mentioned by ancient authors. In
90 B.C. it acquired Roman citizenship, but in 82 B.C. having been held
by the partisans of Marius, it was plundered by those of Sulla (who
probably made the Rubicon the frontier of Italy instead of the Aesis),
and a military colony settled there. Caesar occupied it in 49 B.C. after
his crossing of the Rubicon. It was one of the eighteen richest cities
of Italy which the triumviri selected as a reward for their troops. In
27 B.C. Augustus planted new colonists there, and divided the city into
seven _vici_ after the model of Rome, from which the names of the _vici_
were borrowed. He also restored the Via Flaminia (_Mon. Ancyr._ c. 20)
from Rome to Ariminum. At the entrance to the latter the senate erected,
in his honour, a triumphal arch which is still extant--a fine simple
monument with a single opening. At the other end of the _decumanus
maximus_ or main street (3000 Roman ft. in length) is a fine bridge over
the Ariminus (mod. Marecchia) begun by Augustus and completed by
Tiberius in A.D. 20. It has five wide arches, the central one having a
span of 35 ft., and is well preserved. Both it and the arch are built of
Istrian stone. The present Piazza Giulio Cesare marks the site of the
ancient forum. The remains of the amphitheatre are scanty; many of its
stones have gone to build the city wall, which must, therefore, at the
earliest belong to the end of the classical period. In A.D. 1 Augustus's
grandson Gaius Caesar had all the streets of Ariminum paved. In A.D. 69
the town was attacked by the partisans of Vespasian, and was frequently
besieged in the Gothic wars. It was one of the five seaports which
remained Byzantine until the time of Pippin. (See RIMINI.)

  See A. Tonini, _Storia della Città di Rimini_ (Rimini, 1848-1862).
       (T. As.)