ARION, of Methymna, in Lesbos, a semi-legendary poet and musician,
friend of Periander, tyrant of Corinth. He flourished about 625 B.C.
Several of the ancients ascribe to him the invention of the dithyramb
and of dithyrambic poetry; it is probable, however, that his real
service was confined to the organization of that verse, and the
conversion of it from a mere drunken song, used in the Dionysiac revels,
to a measured antistrophic hymn, sung by a trained body of performers.
The name Cycleus given to his father indicates the connexion of the son
with the "cyclic" or circular chorus which was the origin of tragedy.
According to Suidas he composed a number of songs and proems; none of
these is extant; the fragment of a hymn to Poseidon attributed to him
(Aelian, _Hist. An._ xii. 45) is spurious and was probably written in
Attica in the time of Euripides. Nothing is known of the life of Arion,
with the exception of the beautiful story first told by Herodotus (i.
23) and elaborated and embellished by subsequent writers. According to
Herodotus, Arion being desirous of exhibiting his skill in foreign
countries left Corinth, and travelled through Sicily and parts of Italy,
where he gained great fame and amassed a large sum of money. At Taras
(Tarentum) he embarked for his homeward voyage in a Corinthian vessel.
The sight of his treasure roused the cupidity of the sailors, who
resolved to possess themselves of it by putting him to death. In answer
to his entreaties that they would spare his life, they insisted that he
should either die by his own hand on shipboard or cast himself into the
sea. Arion chose the latter, and as a last favour begged permission to
sing a parting song. The sailors, desirous of hearing so famous a
musician, consented, and the poet, standing on the deck of the ship, in
full minstrel's attire, sang a dirge accompanied by his lyre. He then
threw himself overboard; but instead of perishing, he was miraculously
borne up in safety by a dolphin, supposed to have been charmed by the
music. Thus he was conveyed to Taenarum, whence he proceeded to Corinth,
arriving before the ship from Tarentum. Immediately on his arrival Arion
related his story to Periander, who was at first incredulous, but
eventually learned the truth by a stratagem. Summoning the sailors, he
demanded what had become of the poet. They affirmed that he had remained
behind at Tarentum; upon which they were suddenly confronted by Arion
himself, arrayed in the same garments in which he had leapt overboard.
The sailors confessed their guilt and were punished. Arion's lyre and
the dolphin were translated to the stars. Herodotus and Pausanias (iii.
25. 7) both refer to a brass figure at Taenarum which was supposed to
represent Arion seated on the dolphin's back. But this story is only one
of several in which the dolphin appears as saving the lives of favoured
heroes. For instance, it is curious that Taras, the mythical founder of
Tarentum, is said to have been conveyed in this manner from Taenarum to
Tarentum. On Tarentine coins a man and dolphin appear, and hence it may
be thought that the monument at Taenarum represented Taras and not
Arion. At the same time the connexion of Apollo with the dolphin must
not be forgotten. Under this form the god appeared when he founded the
celebrated oracle at Delphi, the name of which commemorates the
circumstance. He was also the god of music, the special preserver of
poets, and to him the lyre was sacred.

  Among the numerous modern versions of the story, particular mention
  may be made of the pretty ballad by A.W. Schlegel; see also Lehrs,
  _Populare Aufsatze aus dem Alterthum_ (1844-1846); Clement, _Arion_
  (1898).