ARISTOCRACY (Gr. [Greek: aristos], best; [Greek: aristos], government),
etymologically, the "rule of the best," a form of government variously
defined and appreciated at different times and by different authorities.
In Greek political philosophy, aristocracy is the government of those
who most nearly attain to the ideal of human perfection. Thus Plato in
the _Republic_ advocates the rule of the "philosopher-king" who, in the
social scheme, is analogous to Reason in the intellectual, and alone is
qualified to control the active principles, i.e. the fighting population
and the artisans or workers. Aristocracy is thus the government by those
who are superior both morally and intellectually, and, therefore, govern
directly in the interests of the governed, as a good doctor works for
the good of his patient. Aristotle classified good governments under
three heads--monarchy, aristocracy and commonwealth [Greek: politeia],
to which he opposed the three perverted forms--tyranny or absolutism,
oligarchy and democracy or mob-rule. The distinction between aristocracy
and oligarchy, which are both necessarily the rule of the few, is that
whereas the few [Greek: aristoi] will govern unselfishly, the oligarchs,
being the few wealthy ("plutocracy" in modern terminology), will allow
their personal interests to predominate. While Plato's aristocracy might
be the rule of the wise and benevolent despot, Aristotle's is
necessarily the rule of the few.

Historically aristocracy develops from primitive monarchy by the gradual
progressive limitation of the regal authority. This process is effected
primarily by the nobles who have hitherto formed the council of the king
(an excellent example will be found in Athenian politics, see ARCHON),
whose triple prerogative--religious, military and judicial--is vested,
e.g., in a magistracy of three. These are either members of the royal
house or the heads of noble families, and are elected for life or
periodically by their peers, i.e. by the old royal council (cf. the
Areopagus at Athens, the Senate at Rome), now the sovereign power. In
practice this council depends primarily on a birth qualification, and
thus has always been more or less inferior to the Aristotelian ideal; it
is, by definition, an "oligarchy" of birth, and is recruited from the
noble families, generally by the addition of emeritus magistrates. From
the earliest times, therefore, the word "aristocracy" became practically
synonymous with "oligarchy," and as such it is now generally used in
opposition to democracy (which similarly took the place of Aristotle's
[Greek: politeia]), in which the ultimate sovereignty resides in the
whole citizen body.

The aristocracy of which we know most in ancient Greece was that of
Athens prior to the reforms of Cleisthenes, but all the Greek
city-states passed through a period of aristocratic or oligarchic
government. Rome, between the regal and the imperial periods, was always
more or less under the aristocratic government of the senate, in spite
of the gradual growth of democratic institutions (the Lat. _optimates_
is the equivalent of [Greek: aristoi]). There is, however, one feature
which distinguishes these aristocracies from those of modern states,
namely, that they were all slave-owning. The original relation of the
slave-population, which in many cases outnumbered the free citizens,
cannot always be discovered. But in some cases we know that the slaves
were the original inhabitants who had been overcome by an influx of
racially different invaders (cf. Sparta with its Helots); in others they
were captives taken in war. Hence even the most democratic states of
antiquity were so far aristocratic that the larger proportion of the
inhabitants had no voice in the government. In the second place this
relation gave rise to a philosophic doctrine, held even by Aristotle,
that there were peoples who were inferior by nature and adapted to
submission ([Greek: phusei douloi]); such people had no "virtue" in the
technical civic sense, and were properly occupied in performing the
menial functions of society, under the control of the [Greek: aristoi].
Thus, combined with the criteria of descent, civic status and the
ownership of the land, there was the further idea of intellectual and
social superiority. These qualifications were naturally, in course of
time, shared by an increasingly large number of the lower class who
broke down the barriers of wealth and education. From this stage the
transition is easy to the aristocracy of wealth, such as we find at
Carthage and later at Venice, in periods when the importance of commerce
was paramount and mercantile pursuits had cast off the stigma of
inferiority (in Gr. [Greek: banausia]).

It is important at this stage to distinguish between aristocracy and the
feudal governments of medieval Europe. In these it is true that certain
power was exercised by a small number of families, at the expense of the
majority. But under this system each noble governed in a particular area
and within strict limitations imposed by his sovereign; no sovereign
authority was vested in the nobles collectively.

Under the conditions of the present day the distinction of aristocracy,
democracy and monarchy cannot be rigidly maintained from a purely
governmental point of view. In no case does the sovereign power in a
state reside any longer in an aristocracy, and the word has acquired a
social rather than a political sense as practically equivalent to
"nobility," though the distinction is sometimes drawn between the
"aristocracy of birth" and the "aristocracy of wealth." Modern history,
however, furnishes many examples of government in the hands of an
aristocracy. Such were the aristocratic republics of Venice, Genoa and
the Dutch Netherlands, and those of the free imperial cities in Germany.
Such, too, in practice though not in theory, was the government of Great
Britain from the Revolution of 1689 to the Reform Bill of 1832. The
French nobles of the _Ancien Régime_, denounced as "aristocrats" by the
Revolutionists, had no share as such in government, but enjoyed
exceptional privileges (e.g. exemption from taxation). This privileged
position is still enjoyed by the heads of the German mediatized families
of the "High Nobility." In Great Britain, on the other hand, though the
aristocratic principle is still represented in the constitution by the
House of Lords, the "aristocracy" generally, apart from the peers, has
no special privileges.