ARISTOMENES, of Andania, the semi-legendary hero of the second Messenian
war. He was a member of the Aepytid family, the son of Nicomedes (or,
according to another version, of Pyrrhus) and Nicoteleia, and took a
prominent part in stirring up the revolt against Sparta and securing the
co-operation of Argos and Arcadia. He showed such heroism in the first
encounter, at Derae, that the crown was offered him, but he would accept
only the title of commander-in-chief. His daring is illustrated by the
story that he came by night to the temple of Athene "of the Brazen
House" at Sparta, and there set up his shield with the inscription,
"Dedicated to the goddess by Aristomenes from the Spartans." His prowess
contributed largely to the Messenian victory over the Spartan and
Corinthian forces at "The Boar's Barrow" in the plain of Stenyclarus,
but in the following year the treachery of the Arcadian king
Aristocrates caused the Messenians to suffer a crushing defeat at "The
Great Trench." Aristomenes and the survivors retired to the mountain
stronghold of Eira, where they defied the Spartans for eleven years. On
one of his raids he and fifty of his companions were captured and thrown
into the Caeadas, the chasm on Mt. Taygetus into which criminals were
cast. Aristomenes alone was saved, and soon reappeared at Eira: legend
told how he was upheld in his fall by an eagle and escaped by grasping
the tail of a fox, which led him to the hole by which it had entered. On
another occasion he was captured during a truce by some Cretan
auxiliaries of the Spartans, and was released only by the devotion of a
Messenian girl who afterwards became his daughter-in-law. At length Eira
was betrayed to the Spartans (668 B.C. according to Pausanias), and
after a heroic resistance Aristomenes and his followers had to evacuate
Messenia and seek a temporary refuge with their Arcadian allies. A
desperate plan to seize Sparta itself was foiled by Aristocrates, who
paid with his life for his treachery. Aristomenes retired to Ialysus in
Rhodes, where Damagetus, his son-in-law, was king, and died there while
planning a journey to Sardis and Ecbatana to seek aid from the Lydian
and Median sovereigns (Pausanias iv. 14-24). Another tradition
represents him as captured and slain by the Spartans during the war
(Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ xi. 187; Val. Maximus i. 8, 15; Steph. Byzant. s.v.
[Greek: Andania]). Though there seems to be no conclusive reason for
doubting the existence of Aristomenes, his history, as related by
Pausanias, following mainly the _Messeniaca_ of the Cretan epic poet
Rhianus (about 230 B.C.), is evidently largely interwoven with fictions.
These probably arose after the foundation of Messene in 369 B.C.
Aristomenes' statue was set up in the stadium there: his bones were
fetched from Rhodes and placed in a tomb surmounted by a column (Paus.
iv. 32. 3, 6); and more than five centuries later we still find heroic
honours paid to him, and his exploits a popular subject of song (_ib_.
iv. 14. 7; 16. 6).

  For further details see Pausanias iv.; Polyaenus ii. 31; G. Grote,
  _History of Greece_, pt. ii. chap. vii.; M. Duncker, _History of
  Greece_, Eng. trans., book iv. chap, viii.; A. Holm, _History of
  Greece_, Eng. trans., vol. i. chap. xvi.     (M. N. T.)