ARISTOPHANES (c. 448-385 B.C.[1]), the great comic dramatist and poet of
Athens. His birth-year is uncertain. He is known to have been about the
same age as Eupolis, and is said to have been "almost a boy" when his
first comedy (_The Banqueters_) was brought out in 427 B.C. His father
Philippus was a landowner in Aegina. Aristophanes was an Athenian
citizen of the tribe Pandionis, and the deme Cydathene. The stories
which made him a native of Camirus in Rhodes, or of the Egyptian
Naucratis, had probably no other foundation than an indictment for
usurpation of civic rights ([Greek: xenias graphae]) which appears to
have been more than once laid against him by Cleon. His three
sons--Philippus, Araros and Nicostratus--were all comic poets.
Philippus, the eldest, was a rival of Eubulus, who began to exhibit in
376 B.C. Araros brought out two of his father's latest comedies--the
_Cocalus_ and the _Aeolosicon_, and in 375 began to exhibit works of his
own. Nicostratus, the youngest, is assigned by Athenaeus to the Middle
Comedy, but belongs, as is shown by some of the names and characters of
his pieces, to the New Comedy also.

Although tragedy and comedy had their common origin in the festivals of
Dionysus, the regular establishment of tragedy at Athens preceded by
half a century that of comedy. The Old Comedy may be said to have lasted
about eighty years (470-390 B.C.), and to have flourished about
fifty-six (460-404 B.C.). Of the forty poets who are named as having
illustrated it the chief were Cratinus, Eupolis and Aristophanes. The
Middle Comedy covers a period of about seventy years (390-320 B.C.), its
chief poets being Antiphanes, Alexis, Theopompus and Strattis. The New
Comedy was in vigour for about seventy years (320-250 B.C.), having for
its foremost representatives Menander, Philemon and Diphilus. The Old
Comedy was possible only for a thorough democracy. Its essence was a
satirical censorship, unsparing in personalities, of public and of
private life--of morality, of statesmanship, of education, of
literature, of social usage--in a word, of everything which had an
interest for the city or which could amuse the citizens. Preserving all
the freedom of banter and of riotous fun to which its origin gave it an
historical right, it aimed at associating with this a strong practical
purpose--the expression of a democratic public opinion in such a form
that no misconduct or folly could altogether disregard it. That
licentiousness, that grossness of allusion which too often disfigures
it, was, it should be remembered, exacted by the sentiment of the
Dionysiac festivals, as much as a decorous cheerfulness is expected at
the holiday times of other worships. This was the popular element.
Without this the entertainment would have been found flat and
unseasonable. But for a comic poet of the higher calibre the
consciousness of a recognized power which he could exert, and the desire
to use this power for the good of the city, must always have been the
uppermost feelings. At Athens the poet of the Old Comedy had an
influence analogous, perhaps, rather to that of the journalist than to
that of the modern dramatist. But the established type of Dionysiac
comedy gave him an instrument such as no public satirist has ever
wielded. When Molière wished to brand hypocrisy he could only make his
Tartuffe the central figure of a regular drama, developed by a regular
process to a just catastrophe. He had no choice between touching too
lightly and using sustained force to make a profound impression. The
Athenian dramatist of the Old Comedy worked under no such limitations of
form. The wildest flights of extravagance were permitted to him. Nothing
bound him to a dangerous emphasis or a wearisome insistence. He could
deal the keenest thrust, or make the most earnest appeal, and at the
next moment--if his instinct told him that it was time to change the
subject--vary the serious strain by burlesque. He had, in short, an
incomparable scope for trenchant satire directed by sure tact.

Aristophanes is for us the representative of the Old Comedy. But his
genius, while it includes, also transcends the genius of the Old Comedy.
He can denounce the frauds of a Cleon, he can vindicate the duty of
Athens to herself and to her allies, with a stinging scorn and a force
of patriotic indignation which makes the poet almost forgotten in the
citizen. He can banter Euripides with an ingenuity of light mockery
which makes it seem for the time as if the leading Aristophanic trait
was the art of seeing all things from their prosaic side. Yet it is
neither in the denunciation nor in the mockery that he is most
individual. His truest and highest faculty is revealed by those
wonderful bits of lyric writing in which he soars above everything that
can move laughter or tears, and makes the clear air thrill with the
notes of a song as free, as musical and as wild as that of the
nightingale invoked by his own chorus in the _Birds_. The speech of
Dikaios Logos in the _Clouds_, the praises of country life in the
_Peace_, the serenade in the _Ecclesiazusae_, the songs of the Spartan
and Athenian maidens in the _Lysistrata_, above all, perhaps, the chorus
in the _Frogs_, the beautiful chant of the Initiated,--these passages,
and such as these, are the true glories of Aristophanes. They are the
strains, not of an artist, but of one who warbles for pure gladness of
heart in some place made bright by the presence of a god. Nothing else
in Greek poetry has quite this wild sweetness of the woods. Of modern
poets Shakespeare alone, perhaps, has it in combination with a like
richness and fertility of fancy.

Fifty-four[2] comedies were ascribed to Aristophanes. Forty-three of
these are allowed as genuine by Bergk. Eleven only are extant. These
eleven form a running commentary on the outer and the inner life of
Athens during thirty-six years. They may be ranged under three periods.
The first, extending to 420 B.C., includes those plays in which
Aristophanes uses an absolutely unrestrained freedom of political
satire. The second ends with the year 405. Its productions are
distinguished from those of the earlier time by a certain degree of
reticence and caution. The third period, down to 388 B.C., comprises two
plays in which the transition to the character of the Middle Comedy is
well marked, not merely by disuse of the parabasis, but by general
self-restraint.

I. _First Period_, (1) 425 B.C. _The Acharnians._--Since the defeat in
Boeotia the peace party at Athens had gained ground, and in this play
Aristophanes seeks to strengthen their hands. Dicaeopolis, an honest
countryman, is determined to make peace with Sparta on his own account,
not deterred by the angry men of Acharnae, who crave vengeance for the
devastation of their vineyards. He sends to Sparta for samples of peace;
and he is so much pleased with the flavour of the Thirty Years' sample
that he at once concludes a treaty for himself and his family. All the
blessings of life descend on him; while Lamachus, the leader of the war
party, is smarting from cold, snow and wounds.

(2) 424 B.C. _The Knights._--Three years before, in his _Babylonians_,
Aristophanes had assailed Cleon as the typical demagogue. In this play
he continues the attack. The Demos, or State, is represented by an old
man who has put himself and his household into the hands of a rascally
Paphlagonian steward. Nicias and Demosthenes, slaves of Demos, contrive
that the Paphlagonian shall be supplanted in their master's favour by a
sausage-seller. No sooner has Demos been thus rescued than his
youthfulness and his good sense return together.

(3) 423 B.C. _The Clouds_ (the first edition; a second edition was
brought out in 422 B.C.).--This play would be correctly described as an
attack on the new spirit of intellectual inquiry and culture rather than
on a school or class. Two classes of thinkers or teachers are, however,
specially satirized under the general name of "Sophist" (v. 331)--1. The
Physical Philosophers--indicated by allusions to the doctrines of
Anaxagoras, Heraclitus and Diogenes of Apollonia. 2. The professed
teachers of rhetoric, belles lettres, &c., such as Protagoras and
Prodicus. Socrates is taken as the type of the entire tendency. A youth
named Pheidippides--obviously meant for Alcibiades--is sent by his
father to Socrates to be cured of his dissolute propensities. Under the
discipline of Socrates the youth becomes accomplished in dishonesty and
impiety. The conclusion of the play shows the indignant father preparing
to burn up the philosopher and his hall of contemplation.

(4) 422 B.C. _The Wasps._--This comedy, which suggested _Les Plaideurs_
to Racine, is a satire on the Athenian love of litigation. The strength
of demagogy, while it lay chiefly in the ecclesia, lay partly also in
the paid dicasteries. From this point of view the _Wasps_ may be
regarded as supplementing the _Knights_. Philocleon (admirer of Cleon),
an old man, has a passion for lawsuits--a passion which his son,
Bdelycleon (detester of Cleon) fails to check, until he hits upon the
device of turning the house into a law-court, and paying his father for
absence from the public suits. The house-dog steals a Sicilian cheese;
the old man is enabled to gratify his taste by trying the case, and, by
an oversight, acquits the defendant. In the second half of the play a
change comes over the dream of Philocleon; from litigation he turns to
literature and music, and is congratulated by the chorus on his happy
conversion.

(5) 421 B.C.[3] _The Peace._--In its advocacy of peace with Sparta, this
play, acted at the Great Dionysia shortly before the conclusion of the
treaty, continues the purpose of the _Acharnians_. Trygaeus, a
distressed Athenian, soars to the sky on a beetle's back. There he finds
the gods engaged in pounding the Greek states in a mortar. In order to
stop this, he frees the goddess Peace from a well in which she is
imprisoned. The pestle and mortar are laid aside by the gods, and
Trygaeus marries one of the handmaids of Peace.

II. _Second Period_. (6) 414 B.C. _The Birds._--Peisthetaerus, an
enterprising Athenian, and his friend Euelpides persuade the birds to
build a city--"Cloud-Cuckoo-borough"--in mid-air, so as to cut off the
gods from men. The plan succeeds; the gods send envoys to treat with the
birds; and Peisthetaerus marries Basileia, daughter of Zeus. Some have
found in the _Birds_ a complete historical allegory of the Sicilian
expedition; others, a general satire on the prevalence at Athens of
headstrong caprice over law and order; others, merely an aspiration
towards a new and purified Athens--a dream to which the poet had turned
from his hope for a revival of the Athens of the past. In another view,
the piece is mainly a protest against the religious fanaticism which the
incident of the Hermae had called forth.

(7) 411 B.C. _The Lysistrata._--This play was brought out during the
earlier stages of those intrigues which led to the revolution of the
Four Hundred. It appeared shortly before Peisander had arrived in Athens
from the camp at Samos for the purpose of organizing the oligarchic
policy. The _Lysistrata_ expresses the popular desire for peace at any
cost. As the men can do nothing, the women take the question into their
own hands, occupy the citadel, and bring the citizens to surrender.

(8) 411 B.C. _The Thesmophoriazusae_ (Priestesses of Demeter).--This
came out three months later than the _Lysistrata_, during the reign of
terror established by the oligarchic conspirators, but before their blow
had been struck. The political meaning of the play lies in the absence
of political allusion. Fear silences even comedy. Only women and
Euripides are satirized. Euripides is accused and condemned at the
female festival of the Thesmophoria.

(9) 405 B.C. _The Frogs._--This piece was brought out just when Athens
had made her last effort in the Peloponnesian War, eight months before
the battle of Aegospotami, and about fifteen months before the taking of
Athens by Lysander. It may be considered as an attempt to distract men's
minds from public affairs. It is a literary criticism. Aeschylus and
Euripides were both lately dead. Athens is beggared of poets; and
Dionysus goes down to Hades to bring back a poet. Aeschylus and
Euripides contend in the under-world for the throne of tragedy; and the
victory is at last awarded to Aeschylus.

III. _Third Period_.[4] (10) 393 B.C.[4] _The Ecclesiazusae_ (women in
parliament).--The women, disguised as men, steal into the ecclesia, and
succeed in decreeing a new constitution. At this time the demagogue
Agyrrhius led the assembly; and the play is, in fact, a satire on the
general demoralization of public life.

(11) 388 B.C. _The Plutus_ (Wealth).--The first edition of the play had
appeared in 408 B.C., being a symbolical representation of the fact that
the victories won by Alcibiades in the Hellespont had brought back the
god of wealth to the treasure-chamber of the Parthenon. In its extant
form the _Plutus_ is simply a moral allegory. Chremylus, a worthy but
poor man, falls in with a blind and aged wanderer, who proves to be the
god of wealth. Asclepius restores eyesight to Plutus; whereupon all the
just are made rich and all the unjust are reduced to poverty.

  Among the lost plays, the following are the chief of which anything is
  known:--

  1. _The Banqueters_ [Greek: Daitaleis], 427 B.C.--A satire on young
  Athens. A father has two sons; one is brought up in the good old
  school, another in the tricky subtleties of the new; and the contrast
  of results is the chief theme.

  2. _The Babylonians_, 426 B.C.--Under this name the subject-allies of
  Athens are represented as "Babylonians"-barbarian slaves, employed to
  grind in the mill. The oppression of the allies by the demagogues--a
  topic often touched elsewhere--was, then, the main subject of the
  piece, in which Aristophanes is said to have attacked especially the
  system of appointing to offices by lot. The comedy is memorable as
  opening that Aristophanic war upon Cleon which was continued in the
  _Knights_ and the _Wasps_.

  _The Merchantmen, The Farmers, The Preliminary Contest_ (_Proagon_),
  and possibly the _Old Age_ (_Geras_), belonged to the First Period.
  The _Geras_ is assigned by Süvern to 422 B.C., and is supposed to have
  been a picture of dotage similar to that in the _Knights_. A comedy
  called _The Islands_ is conjectured to have dealt with the sufferings
  imposed by the war on the insular tributaries. The _Triphales_ was
  probably a satire on Alcibiades; the _Storks_, on the tragic poet
  Patrocles.

  In the _Aeolosicon_--produced by his son Araros in 387
  B.C.--Aristophanes probably parodied the _Aeolus_ of Euripides. The
  _Cocalus_ is thought to have been a parody of the legend, according to
  which a Sicilian king of that name slew Minos.

A sympathetic reader of Aristophanes can hardly fail to perceive that,
while his political and intellectual tendencies are well marked, his
opinions, in so far as they colour his comedies, are too indefinite to
reward, or indeed to tolerate, analysis. Aristophanes was a natural
conservative. His ideal was the Athens of the Persian wars. He
disapproved the policy which had made Athenian empire irksome to the
allies and formidable to Greece; he detested the vulgarity and the
violence of mob-rule; he clave to the old worship of the gods; he
regarded the new ideas of education as a tissue of imposture and
impiety. How far he was from clearness or precision of view in regard to
the intellectual revolution which was going forward, appears from the
_Clouds_, in which thinkers and literary workers who had absolutely
nothing in common are treated with sweeping ridicule as prophets of a
common heresy. Aristophanes is one of the men for whom opinion is mainly
a matter of feeling, not of reason. His imaginative susceptibility gave
him a warm and loyal love for the traditional glories of Athens, however
dim the past to which they belonged; a horror of what was ugly or
ignoble in the present; a keen perception of what was offensive or
absurd in pretension. The broad preferences and dislikes thus generated
were enough not only to point the moral of comedy, but to make him, in
many cases, a really useful censor for the city. The service which he
could render in this way was, however, only negative. He could hardly
be, in any positive sense, a political or a moral teacher for Athens.
His rooted antipathy to intellectual progress, while it affords easy and
wide scope for his wit, must after all, lower his intellectual rank. The
great minds are not the enemies of ideas. But as a mocker--to use the
word which seems most closely to describe him on this side--he is
incomparable for the union of subtlety with riot of the comic
imagination. As a poet, he is immortal. And, among Athenian poets, he
has it for his distinctive characteristic that he is inspired less by
that Greek genius which never allows fancy to escape from the control of
defining, though spiritualizing, reason, than by such ethereal rapture
of the unfettered fancy as lifts Shakespeare or Shelley above it,--

     "Pouring his full heart
  In profuse strains of unpremeditated art."

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Editio princeps (Aldine, Venice, 1498), by Marcus
  Musurus (not including the _Lysistrata_ and _Thesmophoriazusae_); S.
  Bergler (ed. P. Burmann, 1760); Invernizi-Beck-Dindorf (1794-1834); I.
  Bekker (1829); H.A. Holden (expurgated text, 1868), with
  _Onomasticon_ (new ed., 1902); F.H.M. Blaydes (1880-1893), and
  critical edition (1886); J. van Leeuwen (1893 foll.); F.W. Hall and
  E.M. Geldart (text, 1900-1901), with the fragment (from the
  Oxyrhynchus papyri) of a dialogue between two women concerning a
  leathern phallus, perhaps from Aristophanes. There is a complete
  edition of the valuable scholia by F. Dübner (1842, Didot
  series),--with the anonymous biographies of the poet; of the Ravenna
  MS. by A. Martin (1883), and W.G. Rutherford (1896-1905). Among
  English translations mention may be made of those of V.J. Hickie
  (prose, in Bohn's _Classical Library_); (verse) J. Hookham Frere, five
  plays; T. Mitchell, four plays; and, above all, B.B. Rogers, a
  brilliant work of exceptional merit. There is a concordance to the
  plays and fragments by H. Dunbar (1883). On Aristophanes generally see
  H. Müller-Strübing, _Aristophanes und die historische Kritik_ (1873);
  the article by G. Kaibel in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopadie_, ii. 1
  (1896); A. Couat, _Aristophane et l'ancienne comédie attique_ (1889);
  E. Deschanel, _Études sur Aristophane_ (3rd ed., 1892); G. Dantu,
  _Opinions et critiques d'Aristophane sur le mouvement politique et
  intellectuel à Athènes_ (Paris, 1907). For the numerous editions and
  translations of separate plays in English and other languages see the
  introductions to Blaydes's edition, and, for the literature, the
  introduction to W.J.M. Starkie's edition of the _Wasps_ (1897); W.
  Engelmann, _Scriptores Graeci_ (1880); and "Bericht über die Literatur
  der griechischen Komödie aus den Jahren 1892-1901" in C. Bursian's
  _Jahresbericht über die Fortschritte der classischen
  Altertumswissenschaft_, cxvi. (1904).     (R. C. J.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The dates in the text, as given by Jebb, are retained. According
    to R.G. Kent, _Classical Review_ (April 1905, April 1906),
    Aristophanes was born in 465, and died in 375 B.C.

  [2] Or "fourty-four" (reading [Greek: mt'] for [Greek: nd'] in
    Suidas).

  [3] See E. Curtius, _Hist. of Greece_, iii (Eng. trans. p. 275).

  [4] The date is uncertain; others give 392 and 389.