ARISTIDES, AELIUS, surnamed THEODORUS, Greek rhetorician and sophist,
son of Eudaemon, a priest of Zeus, was born at Hadriani in Mysia, A.D.
117 (or 129). He studied under Herodes Atticus of Athens, Polemon of
Smyrna, and Alexander of Cotyaeum, in whose honour he composed a funeral
oration still extant. In the practice of his calling he travelled
through Greece, Italy, Egypt and Asia, and in many places the
inhabitants erected statues to him in recognition of his talents. In 156
he was attacked by an illness which lasted thirteen years, the nature of
which has caused considerable speculation. However, it in no way
interfered with his studies; in fact, they were prescribed as part of
his cure. Aristides' favourite place of residence was Smyrna. In 178,
when it was destroyed by an earthquake, he wrote an account of the
disaster to Aurelius, which deeply affected the emperor and induced him
to rebuild the city. The grateful inhabitants set up a statue in honour
of Aristides, and styled him the "builder" of Smyrna. He refused all
honours from them except that of priest of Asclepius, which office he
held till his death, about 189. The extant works of Aristides consist of
two small rhetorical treatises and fifty-five declamations, some not
really speeches at all. The treatises are on _political_ and _simple
speech_, in which he takes Demosthenes and Xenophon as models for
illustration; some critics attribute these to a later compiler (Spengel,
_Rhetores Graeci_). The six _Sacred Discourses_ have attracted some
attention. They give a full account of his protracted illness, including
a mass of superstitious details of visions, dreams and wonderful cures,
which the god Asclepius ordered him to record. These cures, from his
account, offer similarities to the effects produced by hypnotism. The
speeches proper are epideictic or show speeches--on certain gods,
panegyrics of the emperor and individual cities (Smyrna, Rome);
justificatory--the attack on Plato's _Gorgias_ in defence of rhetoric
and the four statesmen, Thucydides, Miltiades, Pericles, Cimon;
symbouleutic or political, the subjects being taken from the past
history of free Greece--the Sicilian expedition, peace negotiations with
Sparta, the political situation after the battle of Leuctra. The
_Panathenaicus_ and _Encomium of Rome_ were actually delivered, the
former imitated from Isocrates. The _Leptinea_--the genuineness of which
is disputed--contrast unfavourably with the speech of Demosthenes.
Aristides' works were highly esteemed by his contemporaries; they were
much used for school instruction, and distinguished rhetoricians wrote
commentaries upon them. His style, formed on the best models, is
generally clear and correct, though sometimes obscured by rhetorical
ornamentation; his subjects being mainly fictitious, the cause possessed
no living interest, and his attention was concentrated on form and
diction.

  Editio princeps (52 declamations only) (1517); Dindorf (1829); Keil
  (1899); Sandys, _Hist. of Class. Schol._ i. 312 (ed. 1906).