ARISTIDES [[Greek: Aristeides]] (c. 530-468 B.C.), Athenian statesman,
called "the Just," was the son of Lysimachus, and a member of a family
of moderate fortune. Of his early life we are told merely that he became
a follower of the statesman Cleisthenes and sided with the aristocratic
party in Athenian politics. He first comes into notice as strategus in
command of his native tribe Antiochis at Marathon, and it was no doubt
in consequence of the distinction which he then achieved that he was
elected chief archon for the ensuing year (489-488). In pursuance of his
conservative policy which aimed at maintaining Athens as a land power,
he was one of the chief opponents of the naval policy of Themistocles
(q.v.). The conflict between the two leaders ended in the ostracism of
Aristides, at a date variously given between 485 and 482. It is said
that, on this occasion, a voter, who did not know him, came up to him,
and giving him his sherd, desired him to write upon it the name of
Aristides. The latter asked if Aristides had wronged him. "No," was the
reply, "and I do not even know him, but it irritates me to hear him
everywhere called _the just_."

Early in 480 Aristides profited by the decree recalling the
post-Marathonian exiles to help in the defence of Athens against the
Persian invaders, and was elected strategus for the year 480-479. In the
campaign of Salamis he rendered loyal support to Themistocles, and
crowned the victory by landing Athenian infantry on the island of
Psyttaleia and annihilating the Persian garrison stationed there (see
SALAMIS). In 479 he was re-elected strategus, and invested with special
powers as commander of the Athenian contingent at Plataea; he is also
said to have judiciously suppressed a conspiracy among some oligarchic
malcontents in the army, and to have played a prominent part in
arranging for the celebration of the victory. In 478 or 477 Aristides
was in command of the Athenian squadron off Byzantium, and so far won
the confidence of the Ionian allies that, after revolting from the
Spartan admiral Pausanias, they offered him the chief command and left
him with absolute discretion in fixing the contributions of the newly
formed confederacy (see DELIAN LEAGUE). His assessment was universally
accepted as equitable, and continued as the basis of taxation for the
greater part of the league's duration; it was probably from this that he
won the title of "the Just." Aristides soon left the command of the
fleet to his friend Cimon (q.v.), but continued to hold a predominant
position in Athens. At first he seems to have remained on good terms
with Themistocles, whom he is said to have helped in outwitting the
Spartans over the rebuilding of the walls of Athens. But in spite of
statements in which ancient authors have represented Aristides as a
democratic reformer, it is certain that the period following the Persian
wars during which he shaped Athenian policy was one of conservative
reaction. (For the theory based on Plutarch, _Aristid._ 22, that
Aristides after Plataea threw open the archonship to all the citizens,
see ARCHON.)

He is said by some authorities to have died at Athens, by others on a
journey to the Euxine sea. The date of his death is given by Nepos as
468; at any rate he lived to witness the ostracism of Themistocles,
towards whom he always displayed a generous conduct, but had died before
the rise of Pericles. His estate seems to have suffered severely from
the Persian invasions, for apparently he did not leave enough money to
defray the expenses of his burial, and it is known that his descendants
even in the 4th century received state pensions. (See ATHENS;
THEMISTOCLES.)

  AUTHORITIES.--Herodotus viii. 79-81, 95; ix. 28; "Constitution of
  Athens" (_Ath. Pol._), 22-24, 41; Plutarch, _Aristides_; Cornelius
  Nepos, _Vita Aristidis_. See also E. Meyer, _Geschichte des Altertums_
  (Stuttgart, 1901), iii. pp. 481, 492. In the absence of positive
  information the 4th-century writers (on whom Plutarch and Nepos mainly
  rely) seized upon his surname of "Just," and wove round it a number of
  anecdotes more picturesque than historical. Herodotus is practically
  our only trustworthy authority.     (M. O. B. C.)