ARISTAEUS, a divinity whose worship was widely spread throughout ancient
Greece, but concerning whom the myths are somewhat obscure. The account
most generally received connects him specially with Thessaly. Apollo
carried off from Mount Pelion the nymph Cyrene, daughter or
granddaughter of the river-god Peneus, and conveyed her to Libya, where
she gave birth to Aristaeus. From this circumstance the town of Cyrene
took its name. The child was at first handed over to the care of the
Hours, or the nymph Melissa and the centaur Cheiron. He afterwards left
Libya and went to Thebes, where he received instruction from the Muses
in the arts of healing and prophecy, and married Autonoe, daughter of
Cadmus, by whom he had several children, among others, the unfortunate
Actaeon. He is said to have visited Ceos, where, by erecting a temple to
Zeus Icmaeus (the giver of moisture), he freed the inhabitants from a
terrible drought. The islanders worshipped him, and occasionally
identified him with Zeus, calling him Zeus Aristaeus. After travelling
through many of the Aegean islands, through Sicily, Sardinia and Magna
Graecia, everywhere conferring benefits and receiving divine honours,
Aristaeus reached Thrace, where he was initiated into the mysteries of
Dionysus, and finally disappeared near Mount Haemus. While in Thrace he
is said to have caused the death of Eurydice, who was bitten by a snake
while fleeing from him. Aristaeus was essentially a benevolent deity; he
was worshipped as the first who introduced the cultivation of bees
(Virgil, _Georg._ iv. 315-558), and of the vine and olive; he was the
protector of herdsmen and hunters; he warded off the evil effects of the
dog-star; he possessed the arts of healing and prophecy. He was often
identified with Zeus, Apollo and Dionysus. In ancient sculptures and
coins he is represented as a young man, habited like a shepherd, and
sometimes carrying a sheep on his shoulders. Coins of Ceos exhibit the
head of Aristaeus and Sirius in the form of a dog crowned with rays.

  Pindar, _Pythia_, ix. 5-65; Apollonius Rhodius, schol. on ii. 498,
  500; Diodorus, iv. 81.