ARISTIDES, APOLOGY OF. Until 1878 our knowledge of the early Christian
writer Aristides was confined to the statement of Eusebius that he was
an Athenian philosopher, who presented an apology "concerning the faith"
to the emperor Hadrian. In that year, however, the Mechitharists of S.
Lazzaro at Venice published a fragment in Armenian[1] from the beginning
of the apology; and in 1889 Dr Rendel Harris found the whole of it in a
Syriac version on Mount Sinai. While his edition was passing through the
press, it was observed by the present writer that all the while the work
had been in our hands in Greek, though in a slightly abbreviated form,
as it had been imbedded as a speech in a religious novel written about
the 6th century, and entitled "The Life of Barlaam and Josaphat." The
discovery of the Syriac version reopened the question of the date of the
work. For although its title there corresponds to that given by the
Armenian fragment and by Eusebius, it begins with a formal inscription
to "the emperor Titus Hadrianus Antoninus Augustus Pius"; and Dr R.
Harris is followed by Harnack and others in supposing that it was only
through a careless reading of this inscription that the work was
supposed to have been addressed to Hadrian. If this be the case, it must
be placed somewhere in the long reign of Antoninus Pius (138-161). There
are, however, no internal grounds for rejecting the thrice-attested
dedication to Hadrian his predecessor, and the picture of primitive
Christian life which is here found points to the earlier rather than to
the later date. It is possible that the Apology was read to Hadrian in
person when he visited Athens, and that the Syriac inscription was
prefixed by a scribe on the analogy of Justin's Apology, a mistake being
made in the amplification of Hadrian's name.

The Apology opens thus: "I, O king, by the providence of God came into
the world; and having beheld the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, the
sun and moon, and all besides, I marvelled at their orderly
disposition; and seeing the world and all things in it, that it is moved
by compulsion, I understood that He that moveth and governeth it is God.
For whatsoever moveth is stronger than that which is moved, and
whatsoever governeth is stronger than that which is governed." Having
briefly spoken of the divine nature in the terms of Greek philosophy,
Aristides proceeds to ask which of all the races of men have at all
partaken of the truth about God. Here we have the first attempt at a
systematic comparison of ancient religions. For the purpose of his
inquiry he adopts an obvious threefold division into idolaters, Jews and
Christians. Idolaters, or, as he more gently terms them in addressing
the emperor, "those who worship what among you are said to be gods," he
subdivides into the three great world-civilizations--Chaldeans, Greeks
and Egyptians. He chooses this order so as to work up to a climax of
error and absurdity in heathen worship. The direct nature-worship of the
Chaldeans is shown to be false because its objects are works of the
Creator, fashioned for the use of men. They obey fixed laws and have no
power over themselves. "The Greeks have erred worse than the Chaldeans
... calling those gods who are no gods, according to their evil lusts,
in order that having these as advocates of their wickedness they may
commit adultery, and plunder and kill, and do the worst of deeds." The
gods of Olympus are challenged one by one, and shown to be either vile
or helpless, or both at once. A heaven of quarrelling divinities cannot
inspire a reasonable worship. These gods are not even respectable; how
can they be adorable? "The Egyptians have erred worse than all the
nations; for they were not content with the worships of the Chaldeans
and Greeks, but introduced, moreover, as gods even brute beasts of the
dry land and of the waters, and plants and herbs.... Though they see
their gods eaten by others and by men, and burned, and slain, and
rotting, they do not understand concerning them that they are no gods."

Throughout the whole of the argument there is strong common-sense and a
stern severity unrelieved by conscious humour. Aristides is engaged in a
real contest; he strikes hard blows, and gives no quarter. He cannot
see, as Justin and Clement see, a striving after truth, a feeling after
God, in the older religions, or even in the philosophies of Greece. He
has no patience with attempts to find a deeper meaning in the stories of
the gods. "Do they say that one nature underlies these diverse forms?
Then why does god hate god, or god kill god? Do they say that the
histories are mythical? Then the gods themselves are myths, and nothing
more."

The Jews are briefly treated. After a reference to their descent from
Abraham and their sojourn in Egypt, Aristides praises them for their
worship of the one God, the Almighty Creator; but blames them as
worshipping angels, and observing "sabbaths and new moons, and the
unleavened bread, and the great fast, and circumcision, and cleanness of
meats." He then proceeds to the description of the Christians. He begins
with a statement which, when purged of glosses by a comparison of the
three forms in which it survives, reads thus: "Now the Christians reckon
their race from the Lord Jesus Christ; and He is confessed to be the Son
of God Most High. Having by the Holy Spirit come down from heaven, and
having been born of a Hebrew virgin, He took flesh and appeared unto
men, to call them back from their error of many gods; and having
completed His wonderful dispensation, He was pierced by the Jews, and
after three days He revived and went up to heaven. And the glory of His
coming thou canst learn, O king, from that which is called among them
the evangelic scripture, if thou wilt read it. He bad twelve disciples,
who after His ascent into heaven went forth into the provinces of the
world and taught His greatness; whence they who at this day believe
their preaching are called Christians." This passage contains striking
correspondences with the second section of the Apostles' Creed. The
attribution of the Crucifixion to the Jews appears in several
2nd-century documents; Justin actually uses the words "He was pierced by
you" in his dialogue with Trypho the Jew.

"These are they," he proceeds, "who beyond all the nations of the earth
have found the truth: for they know God as Creator and Maker of all
things, and they worship no other god beside Him; for they have His
commandments graven on their hearts, and these they keep in expectation
of the world to come.... Whatsoever they would not should be done unto
them, they do not to another.... He that hath supplieth him that hath
not without grudging: if they see a stranger they bring him under their
roof, and rejoice over him, as over a brother indeed, for they call not
one another brethren after the flesh, but after the spirit. They are
ready for Christ's sake to give up their own lives; for His commandments
they securely keep, living holily and righteously, according as the Lord
their God hath commanded them, giving thanks to Him at all hours, over
all their food and drink, and the rest of their good things." This
simple description is fuller in the Syriac, but the additional details
must be accepted with caution: for while it is likely that the monk who
appropriated the Greek may have cut it down to meet the exigencies of
his romance, it is the habit of certain Syriac translators to elaborate
their originals. After asserting that "this is the way of truth," and
again referring for further information to "the writings of the
Christians," he says: "And truly this is a new race, and there is
something divine mingled with it." At the close we have a passage which
is found only in the Syriac, but which is shown by internal evidence to
contain original elements: "The Greeks, because they practise foul
things ... turn the ridicule of their foulness upon the Christians."
This is an allusion to the charges of Thyestean banquets and other
immoralities, which the early apologists constantly rebut. "But the
Christians offer up prayers for them, that they may turn from their
error; and when one of them turns, he is ashamed before the Christians
of the deeds that were done by him, and he confesses to God saying: 'In
ignorance I did these things'; and he cleanses his heart, and his sins
are forgiven him, because he did them in ignorance in former time, when
he was blaspheming the true knowledge of the Christians."

These last words point to the use in the composition of this Apology of
a lost apocryphal work of very early date, _The Preaching of Peter_.
This book is known to us chiefly by quotations in Clement of Alexandria:
it was widely circulated, and at one time claimed a place within the
Canon. It was used by the Gnostic Heracleon and probably by the unknown
writer of the epistle to Diognetus. From the fragments which survive we
see that it contained: (1) a description of the nature of God, which
closely corresponds with Arist. i., followed by (2) a warning not to
worship according to the Greeks, with an exposure of various forms of
idolatry; (3) a warning not to worship according to the Jews--although
they alone think they know the true God--for they worship angels and are
superstitious about moons and sabbaths, and feasts, comp. Arist. xiv.;
(4) a description of the Christians as being "a third race," and
worshipping God in "a new way" through Christ; (5) a proof of
Christianity from Jewish prophecy; (6) a promise of forgiveness to Jews
and Gentiles who should turn to Christ, because they had sinned "in
ignorance" in the former time. Now all these points, except the proof
from Jewish prophecy, are taken up and worked out by Aristides with a
frequent use of the actual language of _The Preaching of Peter_. A
criterion is thus given us for the reconstruction of the Apology, where
the Greek which we have has been abbreviated, and we are enabled to
claim with certainty some passages of the Syriac which might otherwise
be suspected as interpolations.

The style of the Apology is exceedingly simple. It is curiously
misdescribed by Jerome, who never can have seen it, as "Apologeticum pro
Christianis contextum philosophorum sententiis." Its merits are its
recognition of the helplessness of the old heathenism to satisfy human
aspiration after the divine, and the impressive simplicity with which it
presents the unfailing argument of the lives of Christians.

  The student may consult _The Apology of Aristides_, Syriac text and
  translation (J.R. Harris), with an appendix containing the Greek
  text, _Texts and Studies_, i. 1 (1891), and a critical discussion by
  R. Seeberg in Zahn's _Forschungen_, v. 2 (1893); also, brief
  discussions by A. Harnack, _Altchristl. Litteratur_, i. 96 ff.,
  _Chronologie_, i. 271 ff., where references to other writers may be
  found. The _Epistola ad omnes philosophos_ and the _Homily on the
  Penitent Thief_, ascribed by Armenian tradition to Aristides, are
  really of 5th-century origin. Trans. of _Apology_ by W.S. Walford
  (1909).     (J. A. R.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] _Codex Venet. ann._, 981, and _Codex Etchmiaz._ of the 11th
    century.