ARIUS ([Greek: Areios]), a name celebrated in ecclesiastical history,
not so much on account of the personality of its bearer as of the
"Arian" controversy which he provoked. Our knowledge of Arius is scanty,
and nothing certain is known of his birth or of his early training.
Epiphanius of Salamis, in his well-known treatise against eighty
heresies (_Haer._ lxix. 3), calls him a Libyan by birth, and if the
statement of Sozomen, a church historian of the 5th century, is to be
trusted, he was, as a member of the Alexandrian church, connected with
the Meletian schism (see MELETIUS OF LYCOPOLIS), and on this account
excommunicated by Peter of Alexandria, who had ordained him deacon.
After the death of Peter (November 25, 311), he was received into
communion by Peter's successor, Achillas, elevated to the presbytery,
and put in charge of one of the great city churches, Baucalis, where he
continued to discharge his duties with apparent faithfulness and
industry after the accession of Alexander. This bishop also held him in
high repute. Theodoret (_Hist. Eccl._ i. 2) indeed does not hesitate to
say that Arius was chagrined because Alexander, instead of himself, had
been appointed to the see of Alexandria, and that the beginning of his
heretical attitude is, in consequence, to be attributed to discontent
and envy. But this must be rejected, for it is a common explanation of
heretical movements with the early church historians, and there is no
evidence for it in the original sources. However, Arius was ambitious.
Epiphanius, using older documents, describes him as a man inflamed with
his own opinionativeness, of a soft and smooth address, calculated to
persuade and attract, especially women: "in no time he had drawn away
seven hundred virgins from the church to his party." When the
controversy broke out, Arius was an old man.

The real causes of the controversy lay in differences as to dogma. Arius
had received his theological education in the school of the presbyter
Lucian of Antioch, a learned man, and distinguished especially as a
biblical scholar. The latter was a follower of Paul of Samosata, bishop
of Antioch, who had been excommunicated in 269, but his theology differed
from that of his master in a fundamental point. Paul, starting with the
conviction that the One God cannot appear substantially ([Greek:
ousiodos]) on earth, and, consequently, that he cannot have become a
person in Jesus Christ, had taught that God had filled the man Jesus with
his Logos ([Greek: sophia]) or Power ([Greek: dynamis]). Lucian, on the
other hand, persisted in holding that the Logos became a person in
Christ. But since he shared the above-mentioned belief of his master,
nothing remained for him but to see in the Logos a second essence,
created by God before the world, which came down to earth and took upon
itself a human body. In this body the Logos filled the place of the
intellectual or spiritual principle. Lucian's Christ, then, was not
"perfect man," for that which constituted in him the personal element was
a divine essence; nor was he "perfect God," for the divine essence having
become a person was other than the One God, and of a nature foreign to
him. It is this idea which Arius took up and interpreted unintelligently.
His doctrinal position is explained in his letters to his patron
Eusebius, bishop of the imperial city of Nicomedia, and to Alexander of
Alexandria, and in the fragments of the poem in which he set forth his
dogmas, which bears the enigmatic title of "Thalia" ([Greek: Thaleia]),
used in Homer, in the sense of "a goodly banquet," most unjustly
ridiculed by Athanasius as an imitation of the licentious style of the
drinking-songs of the Egyptian Sotades (270 B.C.). From these writings it
can even nowadays be seen clearly that the principal object which he had
in view was firmly to establish the unity and simplicity of the eternal
God. However far the Son may surpass other created beings, he remains
himself a created being, to whom the Father before all time gave an
existence formed out of not being ([Greek: ex ouk onton]); hence the name
of _Exoukontians_ sometimes given to Arius's followers. On the other
hand, Arius affirmed of the Son that he was "perfect God, only-begotten"
([Greek: plaeraes theos monogenaes]); that through him God made the
worlds ([Greek: aiones], ages); that he was the product or offspring of
the Father, and yet not as one among things made ([Greek: gennaema all
ouch ton gegenaemenon]). In his eyes it was blasphemy when he heard that
Alexander proclaimed in public that "as God is eternal, so is his
Son,--when the Father, then the Son,--the Son is present in God without
birth ([Greek: agennaetos]), ever-begotten ([Greek: aeigenaes]), an
unbegotten-begotten ([Greek: agennaetogenaes])." He detected in his
bishop Gnosticism, Manichaeism and Sabellianism, and was convinced that
he himself was the champion of pure doctrine against heresy. He was quite
unconscious that his own monotheism was hardly to be distinguished from
that of the pagan philosophers, and that his Christ was a demi-god.

For years the controversy may have been fermenting in the college of
presbyters at Alexandria. Sozomen relates that Alexander only interfered
after being charged with remissness in leaving Arius so long to disturb
the faith of the church. According to the general supposition, the
negotiations which led to the excommunication of Arius and his followers
among the presbyters and deacons took place in 318 or 319, but there are
good reasons for assigning the outbreak of the controversy to the time
following the overthrow of Licinius by Constantine, i.e. to the year
323. In any case, from this time events followed one another to a speedy
conclusion. Arius was not without adherents, even outside Alexandria.
Those bishops who, like him, had passed through the school of Lucian
were not inclined to let him fall without a struggle, as they recognized
in the views of their fellow-student their own doctrine, only set forth
in a somewhat radical fashion. In addressing to Eusebius of Nicomedia a
request for his help, Arius ended with the words: "Be mindful of our
adversity, thou faithful comrade of Lucian's school ([Greek:
sulloukianistaes])"; and Eusebius entered the lists energetically on his
behalf. But Alexander too was active; by means of a circular letter he
published abroad the excommunication of his presbyter, and the
controversy excited more and more general interest.

It reached even the ears of Constantine. Now sole emperor, he saw in the
one Catholic church the best means of counteracting the movement in his
vast empire towards disintegration; and he at once realized how
dangerous dogmatic squabbles might prove to its unity. His letter,
preserved by the imperial biographer, Eusebius of Caesarea, is a state
document inspired by a wisely conciliatory policy; it made out both
parties to be equally in the right and in the wrong, at the same time
giving them both to understand that such questions, the meaning of which
would be grasped only by the few, had better not be brought into public
discussion; it was advisable to come to an agreement where the
difference of opinion was not fundamental. This well-meaning attempt at
reconciliation, betraying as it did no very deep understanding of the
question, came to nothing. No course was left for the emperor except to
obtain a general decision. This took, place at the fist oecumenical
council, which was convened in Nicaea (q.v.) in 325. After various turns
in the controversy, it was finally decided, against Arius, that the Son
was "of the same substance" ([Greek: homoousios]) with the Father, and
all thought of his being created or even subordinate had to be excluded.
Constantine accepted the decision of the council and resolved to uphold
it. Arius and the two bishops of Marmarica Ptolemais, who refused to
subscribe the creed, were excommunicated and banished to Illyria, and
even Eusebius of Nicomedia, who accepted the creed, but not its
anathemas, was exiled to Gaul. Alexander returned to his see triumphant,
but died soon after, and was succeeded by Athanasius (q.v.), his deacon,
with whose indomitable fortitude and strange vicissitudes the further
course of the controversy is bound up.

It only remains for us here to sketch what is known of the future career
of Arius and the Arians. Although defeated at the council of Nicaea, the
Arians were by no means subdued. Constantine, while strongly disposed at
first to enforce the Nicene decrees, was gradually won to a more
conciliatory policy by the influence especially of Eusebius of Caesarea
and Eusebius of Nicomedia, the latter of whom returned from exile in 328
and won the ear of the emperor, whom he baptized on his death-bed. In
330 even Arius was recalled from banishment. Athanasius, on the other
hand, was banished to Trèves in 335. During his absence Arius returned
to Alexandria, but even now the people are said to have raised a fierce
riot against the heretic. In 336 the emperor was forced to summon him to
Constantinople. Bishop Alexander reluctantly assented to receive him
once more into the bosom of the church, but before the act of admission
was completed, Arius was suddenly taken ill while walking in the
streets, and died in a few moments. His death seems to have exercised no
influence worth speaking of on the course of events. His theological
radicalism had in any case never found many convinced adherents. It was
mainly the opposition to the Homoousios, as a formula open to heretical
misinterpretation, and not borne out by Holy Writ, which kept together
the large party known as Semiarians, who under the leadership of the two
Eusebiuses carried on the strife against the Nicenes and especially
Athanasius. Under the sons of Constantine Christian bishops in
numberless synods cursed one another turn by turn. In the western half
of the empire Arianism found no foothold, and even the despotic will of
Constantius, sole emperor after 351, succeeded only for the moment in
subduing the bishops exiled for the sake of their belief. In the east,
on the other hand, the Semiarians had for long the upper hand. They soon
split up into different groups, according as they came to stand nearer
to or farther from the original position of Arius. The actual centre was
formed by the _Homoii_, who only spoke generally of a likeness [Greek:
homoiotaes] of the Son to the Father; to the left of them were the
_Anomoii_, who, with Arius, held the Son to be unlike [Greek: anomoios]
the Father; to the right, the _Homoiousians_ who, taking as their
catchword "likeness of nature" [Greek: homoiotaes kat ousian], thought
that they could preserve the religious content of the Nicene formula
without having to adopt the formula itself. Since this party in the
course of years came more and more into sympathy with the
representatives of the Nicene party, the _Homoousians_, and notably with
Athanasius, the much-disputed formula became more and more popular, till
the council summoned in 381 at Constantinople, under the auspices of
Theodosius the Great, recognized the Nicene doctrine as the only
orthodox one. Arianism, which had lifted up its head again under the
emperor Valens, was thereby thrust out of the state church. It lived to
flourish anew among the Germanic tribes at the time of the great
migrations. Goths, Vandals, Suebi, Burgundians and Langobardi embraced
it; here too as a distinctive national type of Christianity it perished
before the growth of medieval Catholicism, and the name of Arian ceased
to represent a definite form of Christian doctrine within the church, or
a definite party outside it.

  The best account of the proceedings, both political and theological,
  may be found in the following books:--H.M. Gwatkin, _Studies of
  Arianism_ (2nd edit., Cambridge, 1900); A. Harnack, _History of Dogma_
  (Eng. trans., 1894-1899); J.F. Bethune-Baker, _An Introduction to the
  Early History of Christian Doctrine_ (London, 1903); W. Bright, _The
  Age of the Fathers_ (London, 1903). Cardinal Newman's celebrated
  _Arians of the Fourth Century_ is interesting more from the
  controversial than from the historical point of view. See also Paavo
  Snellman, _Der Anfang des arianischen Streites_ (Helsingfors, 1904);
  Sigismund Rogala, _Die Anfange des arianischen Streites_ (Paderborn,
  1907).     (G. K.)