ARKANSAS, a river of the United States of America, rising in the
mountains of central Colorado, near Leadville, in lat. 39° 20' N., long.
106° 15' W., and emptying into the Mississippi, at Napoleon, Arkansas,
in lat. 33° 40' N. Its total length is about 2000 m., and its drainage
basin (greater than that of the Upper Mississippi) about 185,000 sq. m.
It is the greatest western affluent of the Missouri-Mississippi system.
It rises in a pocket of lofty peaks at an altitude of 10,400 ft. on a
sharply sloping plateau, down which it courses as a mountain torrent,
dropping 4625 ft. in 120 m. At Canyon City it passes out of the Rockies
through the Grand Canyon of the Arkansas; then turning eastward, and
soon a turbid, shallow stream, depositing its mountain detritus, it
flows with steadily lessening gradient and velocity in a broad,
meandering bed across the prairies and lowlands of eastern Colorado,
Kansas, Oklahoma and Arkansas, shifting its direction sharply to the
south-east in central Kansas. The Arkansas ordinarily receives little
water from its tributaries save in time of floods. In topography and
characteristics and in the difficulties of its regulation the Arkansas
is in many ways typical of the rivers in the arid regions of the western
states. The gradient below the mountains averages 7.5 ft. per mile
between Canyon City and Wichita, Kansas (543 m.), about 1.5 ft. between
Wichita and Little Rock (659 m.), and 0.65 of a foot from Little Rock to
the mouth (173 m.). The shores are sand, clay or loam throughout some
1300 m., with very rare rock ridges or rapids, and the banks rise low
above ordinary water. The waters are constantly rising and falling, and
almost never is the discharge at any point uniform. Every year there
are, normally, two distinct periods of high water; one an early freshet
due mainly to the heavy winter rainfall on the lower river, when the
upper river is still frozen hard; the other in the late spring, due to
the setting in of rains along the upper courses also, and to the melting
of the snow in the mountains. The lowest waters are from August to
December. In the summer there are sometimes violent floods due to
cloud-bursts. Everywhere along the river there is a never-ending
variation of velocity and discharge, and an equally ceaseless
transformation of the river's bed and contour. These changes become
revolutionary in times of flood. All these characteristics are
accentuated below Little Rock. The depth of water at this point has been
known to vary from 27 ft. to only half-a-foot, and the discharge to fall
to 1170 cub. ft. per second. There is often no more than 1.5 ft. of
water, and far below Little Rock a depth of 3 ft. on crossings is not
infrequent. In many places there are different channels for high and low
water, the latter being partly filled by each freshet, and recut after
each subsidence; and the river meanders tortuously through the alluvial
bottom in scores of great bends, loops and cut-offs. It is estimated
that the eating and caving of the shore below Little Rock averages 7.64
acres per mile every year (as against 1.99 acres above Little Rock). By
way of the White river cut-off the Arkansas finds an additional outlet
through the valley of that river in times of high water, and the White,
when the current in its natural channel is deadened by the backwaters of
the Mississippi, finds an outlet by the same cut-off through the valley
of the Arkansas. This backwater, where it meets and checks the current
of the Arkansas, occasions the precipitation of enormous alluvial
deposits, and vast quantities of snags. The banks are disintegrated
along this part of the river and built up again on the opposite side to
their original height in the extraordinarily short time of two or three
years, the channel remaining all the while narrow. At the mouth of the
White, the Arkansas and the Mississippi the level of recurrent floods is
6 or 8 ft. above the timber-bearing soil along the banks, and all along
the lower river the country is liable to overflow; and as the land
backward from the stream slopes downward from the banks heaped up by
successive flood-deposits, each overflow creates along the river a
fringe of swamps. These features, although exaggerated in the portion of
the river now in question, are qualitatively characteristic of its
entire course below the mountains.

Up to the 30th of June 1907 the government of the United States expended
$2,384,557 on improvements along the Arkansas. Almost half of this sum
was required for snagging operations alone. There is a considerable
traffic on the river within the borders of Arkansas in miscellaneous
freights, and a slight passenger movement. The river is rarely navigable
above Fort Smith, and during a considerable part of the year not above
Pine Bluff. Steamer service is maintained the year round between this
point and Memphis. Ordinarily there are some 400 m. of channel open to
steamers part of the year, and in time of high flood considerably more.
To the mouth of the Grand river (460 m.) the river is open about four
months in a year for vessels of 4 ft. draft and about eight months for
vessels of 2 ft. draft.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--General descriptions of different portions of the river
  are indicated in the Index to the _Reports of the Chief of Engineers,
  U.S. Army_ (many volumes, 1879-1900). See also H. Gannett, _Profiles
  of Rivers in the U.S._ (U.S. Geolog. Survey, 1901); Greenleaf,
  "Western Floods," in _Engin. Mag._ xii. 945-958; U.S. Geolog. Survey,
  _Bull._ 140; I.C. Russell, _Rivers of North America_ (1898); T.J.
  Vivian, _Transportation, Rivers of the Miss. Valley_ (U.S. Census,
  1890, special Rp.).