ARKWRIGHT, SIR RICHARD (1732-1792), English inventor, was born at
Preston in Lancashire, on the 23rd of December 1732, of parents in
humble circumstances. He was the youngest of thirteen children, and
received but a very indifferent education. After serving his
apprenticeship in his native town, he established himself as a barber at
Bolton about 1750, and later amassed a little property from dealing in
human hair and dyeing it by a process of his own. This business he gave
up about 1767 in order to devote himself to the construction of the
spinning frame. The spinning jenny, which was patented by James
Hargreaves (d. 1778), a carpenter of Blackburn, Lancashire, in 1770,
though he had invented it some years earlier, gave the means of spinning
twenty or thirty threads at once with no more labour than had previously
been required to spin a single thread. The thread spun by the jenny
could not, however, be used except as weft, being destitute of the
firmness or hardness required in the longitudinal threads or warp.
Arkwright supplied this deficiency by the invention of the
spinning-frame, which spins a vast number of threads of any degree of
fineness and hardness.

The precise date of the invention is not known; but in 1767 he employed
John Kay, a watchmaker at Warrington, to assist him in the preparation
of the parts of his machine, and he took out a patent for it in 1769.
The first model was set up in the parlour of the house belonging to the
free grammar school at Preston. This invention having been brought to a
fairly advanced stage, he removed to Nottingham in 1768, accompanied by
Kay and John Smalley of Preston, and there erected his first spinning
mill, which was worked by horses. But his operations were at first
greatly fettered by want of capital, until Jedediah Strutt (q.v.),
having satisfied himself of the value of the machines, entered with his
partner, Samuel Need, into partnership with him, and enabled him in 1771
to build a second factory, on a much larger scale, at Cromford in
Derbyshire, the machinery of which was turned by a water-wheel. A fresh
patent, taken out in 1775, covered several additional improvements in
the processes of carding, roving and spinning. As the value of his
processes became known, he began to be troubled with infringements of
his patents, and in 1781 he took action in the courts to vindicate his
rights. In the first case, against Colonel Mordaunt, who was supported
by a combination of manufacturers, the decision was unfavourable to him,
on the sole ground that the description of the machinery in the
specification was obscure and indistinct. In consequence he prepared a
"case," which he at one time intended to lay before parliament, as the
foundation of an application for an act for relief. But this intention
was subsequently abandoned; and in a new trial (_Arkwright_ v.
_Nightingale_) in February 1785, the presiding judge having expressed
himself favourably with respect to the sufficiency of the specification,
a verdict was given for Arkwright. On this, as on the former trial,
nothing was stated against the originality of the invention.

In consequence of these conflicting verdicts, the whole matter was
brought, by a writ of _scire facias_, before the court of King's Bench,
to have the validity of the patent finally settled, and it was not till
this third trial, which took place in June 1785, that Arkwright's claim
to the inventions which formed the subject of the patent was disputed.
To support this new allegation, Arkwright's opponents brought forward,
for the first time, Thomas Highs, or Hayes, a reed-maker at Bolton, who
stated that he had invented a machine for spinning by rollers previously
to 1768, and that he had employed the watchmaker Kay to make a model of
that machine. Kay himself was produced to prove that he had communicated
that model to Arkwright, and that this was the real source of all his
pretended inventions. Having no idea that any attempt was to be made to
overturn the patent on this new ground, Arkwright's counsel were not
prepared with evidence to repel this statement, and the verdict went
against him. On a motion for a new trial on the 10th of November of the
same year it was stated that he was furnished with affidavits
contradicting the evidence that had been given by Kay and others with
respect to the originality of the invention; but the court refused to
grant a new trial, on the ground that, whatever might be the fact as to
the question of originality, the deficiency in the specification was
enough to sustain the verdict, and the cancellation of the patents was
ordered a few days afterwards. His fortunes, however, were not thereby
seriously affected, for by this time his business capacity and
organizing skill had enabled him to consolidate his position, in spite
of the difficulties he had encountered not only from rival manufacturers
but also from the working classes, who in 1779 displayed their antipathy
to labour-saving appliances by destroying a large mill he had erected
near Chorley.

Though a man of great personal strength, Arkwright never enjoyed good
health, and throughout his career of invention and discovery he
laboured under a severe asthmatic affection. A complication of disorders
at length terminated his life on the 3rd of August 1792, at his works at
Cromford. He was knighted in 1786 when he presented a congratulatory
address from the wapentake of Wirksworth to George III., on his escape
from the attempt on his life by Margaret Nicholson.