ARLES, a town of south-eastern France, capital of an arrondissement in
the department of Bouches-du-Rhône, 54 m. N.W. of Marseilles by rail.
Pop. (1906) 16,191. A canal unites Arles with the harbour of Bouc on the
Mediterranean. Arles stands on the left bank of the Rhone, just below
the point at which the river divides to form its delta. A tubular bridge
unites it with the suburb of Trinquetaille on the opposite bank. The
town is hemmed in on the east by the railway line from Lyons to
Marseilles, on the south by the Canal de Craponne. Its streets are
narrow and irregular, and, away from the promenades which border it on
the south, there is little animation. In the centre of the town stand
the Place de la République, a spacious square overlooked by the hôtel de
ville, the museum, and the old cathedral of St Trophime, the finest
Romanesque church in Provence. Founded in the 7th century, St Trophime
has been several times rebuilt, and was restored in 1870. Its chief
portal, which dates from the 12th century, is a masterpiece of graceful
arrangement and rich carving. The interior, plain in itself, contains
interesting sculpture. The choir opens into a beautiful cloister, the
massive vaulting of which is supported on heavy piers adorned with
statuary, between which intervene slender columns arranged in pairs and
surmounted by delicately carved capitals. Two of the galleries are
Romanesque, while two are Gothic. Arles has two other churches of the
Romanesque period, and others of later date. The hôtel de ville, a
building of the 17th century, contains the library. Its clock tower,
surmounted by a statue of Mars, dates from the previous century. The
museum, occupying an old Gothic church, is particularly rich in Roman
remains and in early Christian sarcophagi; there is also a museum of
Provençal curiosities. The tribunal of commerce and the communal college
are the chief public institutions. Arles is not a busy town and its port
is of little importance. There are, however, flour mills, oil and soap
works, and the Paris-Lyon-Méditerranée Railway Company have large
workshops. Sheep-breeding is a considerable industry in the vicinity.
The women of Arles have long enjoyed a reputation for marked beauty, but
the distinctive type is fast disappearing owing to their intermarriage
with strangers who have immigrated to the town.

Arles still possesses many monuments of Roman architecture and art, the
most remarkable being the ruins of an amphitheatre (the _Arénes_),
capable of containing 25,000 spectators, which, in the 11th and 12th
centuries, was flanked with massive towers, of which three are still
standing. There are also a theatre, in which, besides the famous Venus
of Arles, discovered in 1651, many other remains have been found; an
ancient obelisk of a single block, 47 ft. high, standing since 1676 in
the Place de la République; the ruins of the palace of Constantine, the
forum, the thermae and the remains of the Roman ramparts and of
aqueducts. There is, besides, a Roman cemetery known as the Aliscamps
(_Elysii Campi_), consisting of a short avenue once bordered by tombs,
of which a few still remain.

The ancient town, _Arelate_, was an important place at the time of the
invasion of Julius Caesar, who made it a settlement for his veterans. It
was pillaged in A.D. 270, but restored and embellished by Constantine,
who made it his principal residence, and founded what is now the suburb
of Trinquetaille. Under Honorius, it became the seat of the prefecture
of the Gauls and one of the foremost cities in the western empire. Its
bishopric founded by St Trophimus in the 1st century, was in the 5th
century the primatial see of Gaul; it was suppressed in 1790. After the
fall of the Roman empire the city passed into the power of the
Visigoths, and rapidly declined. It was plundered in 730 by the
Saracens, but in the 10th century became the capital of the kingdom of
Arles (see below). In the 12th century it was a free city, governed by a
_podesta_ and _consuls_ after the model of the Italian republics, which
it also emulated in commerce and navigation. In 1251 it submitted to
Charles I. of Anjou, and from that time onwards followed the fortunes of
Provence. A number of ecclesiastical synods have been held at Arles, as
in 314 (see below), 354, 452 and 475.

  See V. Clair, _Monuments d'Arles_ (1837); J.J. Estrangin,
  _Description de la ville d'Arles_ (1845); F. Beissier, _Le Pays
  d'Arles_ (1889); Roger Peyre, _Nîmes, Arles, Orange_ (1903).
       (R. Tr.)

_Synod of Arles (314)._--As negotiations held at Rome in October 313 had
failed to settle the dispute between the Catholics and the Donatists,
the emperor Constantine summoned the first general council of his
western half of the empire to meet at Arles by the 1st of August
following. The attempt of Seeck to date the synod 316 presupposes that
the emperor was present in person, which is highly improbable.
Thirty-three bishops are included in the most authentic list of
signatures, among them three from Britain,--York, London and "Colonia
Londinensium" (probably a corruption of Lindensium, or Lincoln, rather
than of Legionensium or Caerleon-On-Usk). The twenty-two canons deal
chiefly with the discipline of clergy and people. Husbands of adulterous
wives are advised not to remarry during the lifetime of the guilty
party. Reiteration of baptism in the name of the Trinity is forbidden.
For the consecration of a bishop at least three bishops are required. It
is noteworthy that British representatives assented to Canon I.,
providing that Easter be everywhere celebrated on the same day: the
later divergence between Rome and the Celtic church is due to
improvements in the _supputatio Romana_ adopted at Rome in 343 and
subsequently.

  For the canons see Mansi ii. 471 ff.; Bruns ii. 107 ff.; Lauchert 26
  ff. See also W. Smith and S. Cheetham, _Dictionary of Christian
  Antiquities_ (Boston, 1875), i. 141 ff. (contains also notices of
  later synods at Arles); W. Bright, _Chapters of Early English Church
  History_ (2nd edition, Oxford, 1888), 9 f.; Herzog-Hauck,
  _Realencyklopadie_ (3rd edition), ii. 59, x. 238 ff.; W. Moller,
  _Kirchengeschichte_ (2nd edition by H. von Schubert, Tübingen, 1902),
  i. 417. For full titles see COUNCIL.     (W. W. R.*)