ARLES, KINGDOM OF, the name given to the kingdom formed about 933 by the
union of the old kingdoms of Provence (q.v.) or Cisjurane Burgundy, and
Burgundy (q.v.) Transjurane, and bequeathed in 1032 by its last
sovereign, Rudolph III., to the emperor Conrad II. It comprised the
countship of Burgundy (_Franche-Comté_), part of which is now
Switzerland (the dioceses of Geneva, Lausanne, Sion and part of that of
Basel), the Lyonnais, and the whole of the territory bounded by the
Alps, the Mediterranean and the Rhone; on the right bank of the Rhone it
further included the Vivarais. It is only after the end of the 12th
century that the name "kingdom of Arles" is applied to this district;
formerly it was known generally as the kingdom of Burgundy, but under
the Empire the name of Burgundy came to be limited more and more to the
countship of Burgundy, and the districts lying beyond the Jura. The
authority of Rudolph III. over the chief lords of the land, the count of
Burgundy and the count of Maurienne, founder of the house of Savoy, was
already merely nominal, and the Franconian emperors (1039-1125), whose
visits to the country were rare and of short duration, did not establish
their power any more firmly. During the first fifty years of their
domination they could rely on the support of the ecclesiastical
feudatories, who generally favoured their cause, but the investiture
struggle, in which the prelates of the kingdom of Arles mostly sided
with the pope, deprived the Germanic sovereigns even of this support.
The emperors, on the other hand, realized early that their absence from
the country was a grave source of weakness; in 1043 Henry III. conferred
on Rudolph, count of Rheinfelden (afterwards duke of Swabia), the title
of _dux et rector Burgundiae_, giving him authority over the barons of
the northern part of the kingdom of Arles. Towards the middle of the
12th century Lothair II. revived this system, conferring the rectorate
on Conrad of Zähringen, in whose family it remained hereditary up to the
death of the last representative of the house, Berthold V., in 1218; and
it was the lords of Zähringen who were foremost in defending the cause
of the Empire against its chief adversaries, the counts of Burgundy. In
the time of the Swabian emperors, the Germanic sovereignty in the
kingdom of Arles was again, during almost the whole period, merely
nominal, and it was only in consequence of fortuitous circumstances that
certain of the heads of the Empire were able to exercise a real
authority in these parts. Frederick I., by his marriage with Beatrix
(1156), had become uncontested master of the countship of Burgundy;
Frederick II., who was more powerful in Italy than his predecessors had
been, and was extending his activities into the countries of the Levant,
found Provence more accessible to his influence, thanks to the
commercial relations existing between the great cities of this country
and Italy and the East. Moreover, the heretics and enemies of the
church, who were numerous in the south, upheld the emperor in his
struggle against the pope. Henry VII. also, thanks to his good relations
with the princes of Savoy, succeeded in exercising a certain influence
over a part of the kingdom of Arles. The emperors further tried to make
their power more effective by delegating it, first to a viceroy, William
of Baux, prince of Orange (1215), then to an imperial vicar, William of
Montferrat (1220), who was succeeded by Henry of Revello and William of
Manupello. In spite of this, the history of the kingdom of Arles in the
13th century, and still more in the 14th, is distinguished particularly
by the decline of the imperial authority and the progress of French
influence in the country. In 1246 the marriage of Charles, the brother
of Saint Louis, with Beatrice, the heiress to the countship of Provence,
caused Provence to pass into the hands of the house of Anjou, and many
plans were made to win the whole of the kingdom for a prince of this
house. At the beginning of the 14th century the bishops of Lyons and
Viviers recognized the suzerainty of the king of France, and in 1343
Humbert II., dauphin of Viennois, made a compact with the French king
Philip VI. that on his death his inheritance should pass to a son or a
grandson of the French king. Humbert, who was perhaps the most powerful
noble in Arles, was induced to take this step as he had just lost his
only son, and Philip had already cast covetous eyes on his lands. Then
in 1349, being in want of money, he agreed to sell his possessions
outright, and thus Viennois, or Dauphiné, passed into the hands of
Philip's grandson, afterwards King Charles V. The emperor Charles IV.
took an active part in the affairs of the kingdom, but without any
consistent policy, and in 1378 he, in turn, ceded the imperial vicariate
of the kingdom to the dauphin, afterwards King Charles VI. This date may
be taken as marking the end of the history of the kingdom of Arles,
considered as an independent territorial area.

  See the monumental work of P. Fournier, _Le Royaume d'Arles et de
  Vienne_ (Paris, 1890); Leroux, _Recherches critiques sur les relations
  politiques de la France avec l'Allemagne de 1292 à 1378_ (Paris,
  1882). For the early history of the kingdom, L. Jacob, _Le Royaume de
  Bourgogne sous les empereurs franconiens_ (_1038-1129_), (Paris,
  1906). The question of the nature and extent of the rights of the
  Empire over the kingdom of Arles has given rise, ever since the 16th
  century, to numerous juridical polemics; the chief dissertations
  published on this subject are indicated in A. Leroux, _Bibliographie
  des conflits entre la France et l'Empire_ (Paris, 1902).     (R. Po.)