ARLINGTON, HENRY BENNET, EARL OF (1618-1685), English statesman, son of
Sir John Bennet of Dawley, Middlesex, and of Dorothy Crofts, was
baptized at Little Saxham, Suffolk, in 1618, and was educated at
Westminster school and Christ Church, Oxford. He gained some distinction
as a scholar and a poet, and was originally destined for holy orders. In
1643 he was secretary to Lord Digby at Oxford, and was employed as a
messenger between the queen and Ormonde in Ireland. Subsequently he took
up arms for the king, and received a wound in the skirmish at Andover in
1644, the scar of which remained on his face through life.[1] And after
the defeat of the royal cause he travelled in France and Italy, joined
the exiled royal family in 1650, and in 1654 became official secretary
to James on Charles's recommendation, who had already been attracted by
his "pleasant and agreeable humour."[2] In March 1657 he was knighted,
and the same year was sent as Charles's agent to Madrid, where he
remained, endeavouring to obtain assistance for the royal cause, till
after the Restoration. On his return to England in 1661 he was made
keeper of the privy purse, and became the prime favourite. One of his
duties was the procuring and management of the royal mistresses, in
which his success gained him great credit. Allying himself with Lady
Castlemaine, he encouraged Charles's increasing dislike to Clarendon;
and he was made secretary of state in October 1662 in spite of the
opposition of Clarendon, who had to find him a seat in parliament. He
represented Callington from 1661 till 1665, but appears never to have
taken part in debate. He served subsequently on the committees for
explaining the Irish Act of Settlement and for Tangiers. In 1663 he
obtained a peerage as Baron Arlington of Arlington, or Harlington, in
Middlesex, and in 1667 was appointed one of the postmasters-general. The
control of foreign affairs was entrusted to him, and he was chiefly
responsible for the attack on the Smyrna fleet and for the first Dutch
War. In 1665 he advised Charles to grant liberty of conscience, but this
was merely a concession to gain money during the war; and he showed
great activity later in oppressing the nonconformists. On the death of
Southampton, whose administration he had attacked, his great ambition,
the treasurership, was not satisfied; and on the fall of Clarendon,
against whom he had intrigued, he did not, though becoming a member of
the Cabal ministry, obtain the supreme influence which he had expected;
for Buckingham first shared, and soon surpassed him, in the royal
favour. With Buckingham a sharp rivalry sprang up, and they only
combined forces when endeavouring to bring about some evil measure, such
as the ruin of the great Ormonde, who was an opponent of their policy
and their schemes. Another object of jealousy to Arlington was Sir
William Temple, who achieved a great popular success in 1668 by the
conclusion of the Triple Alliance; Arlington endeavoured to procure his
removal to Madrid, and entered with alacrity into Charles's plans for
destroying the whole policy embodied in the treaty, and for making terms
with France. He refused a bribe from Louis XIV., but allowed his wife to
accept a gift of 10,000 crowns;[3] in 1670 he was the only minister
besides the Roman Catholic Clifford to whom the first secret treaty of
Dover (May 1670), one clause of which provided for Charles's declaration
of his conversion to Romanism, was confided (see CHARLES II.); and he
was the chief actor in the deception practised upon the rest of the
council.[4] He supported several other pernicious measures--the scheme
for rendering the king's power absolute by force of arms; the "stop of
the exchequer," involving a repudiation of the state debt in 1672; and
the declaration of indulgence the same year, "that we might keep all
quiet at home whilst we are busy abroad."[5] On the 22nd of April 1672
he was created an earl, and on the 13th of June obtained the Garter; the
same month he proceeded with Buckingham on a mission, first to William
at the Hague, and afterwards to Louis at Utrecht, endeavouring to force
upon the Dutch terms of peace which were indignantly refused. But
Arlington's support of the court policy was entirely subordinate to
personal interests; and after the appointment of Clifford in November
1672 to the treasurership, his jealousy and mortification, together with
his alarm at the violent opposition aroused in parliament, caused him to
veer over to the other side. He advised Charles in March 1673 to submit
the legality of the declaration of indulgence to the House of Lords, and
supported the Test Act of the same year, which compelled Clifford to
resign. He joined the Dutch party, and in order to make his peace with
his new allies, disclosed the secret treaty of Dover to the staunch
Protestants Ormonde and Shaftesbury.[6] Arlington had, however, lost the
confidence of all parties, and these efforts to procure support met with
little success. On the 15th of January 1674 he was impeached by the
Commons, the specific charges being "popery," corruption and the
betrayal of his trust--Buckingham in his own defence having accused him
the day before of being the chief instigator of the French and
anti-Protestant policy, of the scheme of governing by the army, of
responsibility for the Dutch War, and of embezzlement. But the motion
for his removal, owing chiefly to the influence of his brother-in-law,
the popular Lord Ossory, was rejected by 166 votes to 127. His escape
could not, however, prevent his fall, and he resigned the secretaryship
on the 11th of September 1674, being appointed lord chamberlain instead.
In 1675 he made another attempt to gain favour with the parliament by
supporting measures against France and against the Roman Catholics, and
by joining in the pressure put upon Charles to remove James from the
court. In November he went on a mission to the Hague, with the popular
objects of effecting a peace and of concluding an alliance with William
and James's daughter Mary. In this he entirely failed, and he returned
home completely discredited. He had again been disappointed of the
treasurership when Danby succeeded Clifford; Charles having declared
"that he had too much kindness for him to let him have it, for he was
not fit for the office."[7] His intrigues with discontented persons in
parliament to stir up an opposition to his successful rival came to
nothing. From this time, though lingering on at court, he possessed no
influence, and was treated with scanty respect. It was safe to ridicule
his person and behaviour, and it became a common jest for "some courtier
to put a black patch upon his nose and strut about with a white staff in
his hand in order to make the king merry at his expense."[8] He was
appointed a commissioner of the treasury in March 1679, was included in
Sir William Temple's new modelled council the same year, and was a
member of the inner cabinet which was almost immediately formed. In 1681
he was made lord lieutenant of Suffolk. He died on the 28th of July
1685, and was buried at Euston, where he had bought a large estate and
had carried out extensive building operations. His residence in London
was Goring House, on the site of which was built the present Arlington
Street.

Arlington was a typical statesman of the Restoration, possessing
outwardly an attractive personality, and according to Sir W. Temple "the
greatest skill of court and the best turns of art in particular
conversation,"[9] but thoroughly unscrupulous and self-seeking, without
a spark of patriotism, faithless even to a bad cause, and regarding
public office solely as a means of procuring pleasure and profit. His
knowledge of foreign affairs and of foreign languages, gained during his
residence abroad, was considerable, but long absence from England had
also taught him a cosmopolitan indifference to constitutions and
religions, and a careless disregard for English public opinion and the
essential interests of the country. According to Clarendon, he "knew no
more of the constitution and laws of England than he did of China, nor
had he in truth a care or tenderness for church or state, but believed
France was the best pattern in the world."[10] He was one of the chief
promoters of the attempt to reintroduce into England arbitrary
government after the French model, not because he imagined an absolute
monarchy essential to the well-being and security of the state, but
because under such an administration the favourites of a king enjoyed
far greater privileges and profits than under a constitutional
government. Of the same egotistical character was his religion, towards
which his attitude was similar to that of Charles II. himself. He was
credited with having inclined the king towards Romanism. Before the
Restoration he had attended mass with the king abroad, and in opposition
to Lord Bristol had urged Charles to declare publicly his conversion in
order to obtain the long-expected succour from the foreign powers. But
his religion sat lightly upon him as it did upon his master, and it was
often convenient to disguise it. Like the king he continued to profess
and practise Protestantism, and spent large sums in restoring the church
at Euston; and, unlike Clifford, he took the Test in 1673 and remained
in office, successfully concealing his faith till on his deathbed, when
he declared himself an adherent of Roman Catholicism.[11]

He married Isabella of Beerwaert, daughter of Louis of Nassau, by whom
he had one daughter, Isabella, who married Henry, duke of Grafton, the
natural son of Charles II. and Lady Castlemaine.

  AUTHORITIES.--In addition to those mentioned above, see _Biographia
  Britannica_ (Kippis), accurate and careful, but too partial, and
  written without complete knowledge of Arlington's career; Wood's
  _Fasti Oxonienses_ (Bliss), ii. 274; _Hist. of Great Britain_ by J.
  Macpherson (1776), i. 132-133; _Lauderdale Papers_ (Camden Soc. N.S.,
  vols. 34, 36, 38), and MSS. in Brit. Mus.; _Original Letters of Sir R.
  Fanshaw_ (1724); _Letters from the Secretaries of State to Francis
  Parry_ (1817); _Add. MSS. Brit. Mus._ indexes; _Cat. of State Pap.
  Dom._, and _Hist. MSS. Comm.--MSS. of Marquis of Ormonde, and Duke of
  Buccleugh at Montagu House_, ii. 49.     (P. C. Y.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] See his portrait in the earl of Arlington's _Letters to Sir W.
    Temple_, by Tho. Babington (1701).

  [2] Clarendon's _Life and Continuation_, 397.

  [3] _Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland_, by Sir John Dalrymple
    (1790), i. 125.

  [4] _Ibid._ 114 et seq.

  [5] Arlington to Sir B. Gascoyn, in J.T. Brown's _Miscellanea Aulica_
    (1702), 66.

  [6] On the authority of Colbert, 20th November 1673; Dalrymple's
    _Memoirs_, i. 131.

  [7] James's statement in Macpherson's _Orig. Pap._ i. 67.

  [8] Eachard's _History of England_ (1720), 911.

  [9] _Memoirs of W. Temple_, ed. by T.P. Courtenay, ii. 27.

  [10] _Life and Con._ 404.

  [11] Cf. North's _Examen_, 26; Dalrymple's _Mem._ (1790) i. 40;
    Pepys's _Diary_ (Feb. 17, 1663); _Cat. of Clarendon St. Pap._ iii.
    295; T. Carte's _Life of the Duke of Ormonde_ (1851), iv. 109.