ARMAGH, an inland county of Ireland, in the province of Ulster, bounded
N. by Lough Neagh, E. by Co. Down, S. by Louth and W. by Monaghan and
Tyrone. The area is 327,704 acres, or about 512 sq. m. The general
surface of the county is gently undulating and pleasantly diversified;
but in the northern extremity, on the borders of Lough Neagh, there is a
considerable tract of low, marshy land, and the southern border of the
county is occupied by a barren range of hills, the highest of which,
Slieve Gullion, attains an elevation of 1893 ft. In the western portion
of the county are the Few Mountains, a chain of abrupt hills mostly
incapable of cultivation. The county is well watered by numerous
streams. The principal are the Callan, the Tynan and the Tallwater,
flowing into the Blackwater, which, after forming the boundary between
this county and Tyrone, empties itself into the south-western angle of
Lough Neagh. The Tara and Newtown-Hamilton, the Creggan and the Fleury,
flow into the bay of Dundalk. The Cam or Camlin joins the Bann, which,
crossing the north-western corner of the county, falls into Lough Neagh
to the east of the Blackwater. The Newry Canal, communicating with
Carlingford Lough at Warrenpoint, 6 m. below Newry, proceeds northward
through Co. Armagh for about 21 m., joining the Bann at Whitecoat. The
Ulster Canal begins at Charlemont on the river Blackwater, near its
junction with Lough Neagh, proceeding through the western border of the
county, and passing thence to the south-west by Monaghan and Clones into
Upper Lough Erne, after a course of 48 m. Part of Lough Neagh is in the
county, and there are many small loughs, such as Gullion, Cam and Ross.

_Geology._--The flat shore of Lough Neagh in the north is due to the
thick deposit of pale-coloured clays with lignites, which are probably
of Pliocene age, and indicate a reduction of the area of the lake in
still later times. Between this lowland and Armagh city, the early
Cainozoic basalts form slightly higher ground, while on the west a strip
of Trias appears, overlying Carboniferous Limestone. A rough
conglomerate containing blocks of this latter rock forms the hills on
which Armagh itself is built; this outlier is probably Permian. The
Carboniferous Limestone beneath it and around it is red-brown instead of
grey, and is famous for its richness in fish remains. A hummocky
irregular country spreads southward, where the Silurian axis is
encountered, in continuation of the southern uplands of Scotland. Slates
and fine-grained sandstones appear here freely through the glacial
drift. In the south the granite core of this upland is revealed, and is
quarried extensively about Bessbrook. It is penetrated by far younger
intrusive masses at Slieve Gullion and Forkill. These rocks, which
include some highly siliceous lavas, form part of the Eocene series that
is so conspicuously displayed above Carlingford in Co. Louth. Lead-veins
have been worked in various parts of the county from time to time.

_Industries._--The soil of the northern portion of the county is a rich
brown loam, on a substratum of clay or gravel. Towards Charlemont there
is much reclaimable bog resting on a limestone substratum. The eastern
portion of the county is generally of a light friable soil; the southern
portion rocky and barren, with but little bog except in the
neighbourhood of Newtown-Hamilton. The climate of Armagh is considered
to be one of the most genial in Ireland, and less rain is supposed to
fall in this than in any other county. Only about one-twentieth of the
land is naturally barren, and Armagh offers a relatively large area of
cultivable soil. Agriculture, however, is not far advanced, yet owing to
the linen industry the inhabitants are generally in circumstances of
comparative comfort. The principal crops are oats and potatoes, but all
grain crops are decreasing, and flax, formerly grown to a considerable
extent, is now practically neglected. The acreage under pasture slightly
exceeds that of tillage. Cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry show a general
increase in numbers. The principal manufacture, and that which has given
a peculiar tone to the character of the population, is that of linen,
though it has somewhat declined in modern times. It is not necessary to
the promotion of this manufacture that the spinners and weavers should
be congregated in large towns, or united in crowded and unwholesome
factories. On the contrary, most of its branches can be carried on in
the cottages of the peasantry. The men devote to the loom those hours
which are not required for the cultivation of their little farms; the
women spin and reel the yarn during the intervals of their other
domestic occupations. Smooth lawns, pure springs and the open sky are
necessary for perfecting the bleaching process. Hence the numerous
bleachers dwell in the country with their assistants and machinery. Such
is the effect of this combination of agricultural occupations with
domestic manufactures that the farmers are more than competent to supply
the resident population of the county with vegetable, though not with
animal food; and some of the less crowded and less productive parts of
Ulster receive from Armagh a considerable supply of oats, barley and
flour. Apples are grown in such quantities as to entitle the county to
the title applied to it, the orchard of Ireland.

Communications are monopolized by the Great Northern railway company,
whose main line from Belfast divides at Portadown, sending off lines to
Omagh, to Clones and to Dublin. A branch from Omagh joins the Dublin
line to Goraghwood, and from this line there is a branch to Newry in Co.
Down. An electric tram-way connects Bessbrook, a town with important
linen manufactures and granite quarries, with Newry.

_Population and Administration._--The population (72,286 in 1891; 65,619
in 1901) shows a heavy decrease, though emigration affects it less
seriously than the majority of Irish counties. Of the total about 45%
are Roman Catholics, 32% Protestant Episcopalians, and 16%
Presbyterians, the Roman Catholic faith prevailing in the mountainous
districts and the Protestant in the towns and lowlands. About 74% of the
whole constitutes the rural population. The chief towns are Armagh (a
city and the county town, pop. 7588), Lurgan (11,782), Portadown
(10,092), Tanderagee (1427), Bessbrook (2977) and Keady (1466). Armagh
is divided into eight baronies, and contains twenty-five parishes and
parts of parishes, the greater number of which are in the Protestant and
Roman Catholic dioceses of Armagh, and a few in the Roman Catholic
diocese of Dromore. The constabulary has its headquarters at Armagh, the
county being divided into five districts. Assizes are held at Armagh,
and quarter sessions at Armagh, Ballybot, Lurgan, Markethill and
Newtown-Hamilton. The parliamentary divisions are three: mid, north and
south, each returning one member.

_History and Antiquities._--Armagh, together with Louth, Monaghan and
some smaller districts, formed part of a territory called Orgial or
Urial, which was long subject to the occasional incursions of the Danes.
The county was made shire ground in 1586, and called Armagh after the
city by Sir John Perrott. When James I. proceeded to plant with English
and Scottish colonists the vast tracts escheated to the crown in Ulster,
the whole of the arable and pasture land in Armagh, estimated at 77,800
acres, was to have been allotted in sixty-one portions. Nineteen of
these, comprising 22,180 acres, were to have been allotted to the
church, and forty-two, amounting to 55,620 acres, to English and
Scottish colonists, servitors, native Irish and four corporate
towns--the swordsmen to be dispersed throughout Connaught and Munster.
This project was not strictly adhered to in Co. Armagh, nor were the
Irish swordsmen or soldiers transplanted into Connaught and Munster from
this and some other counties. The antiquities consist of cairns and
tumuli; the remains of the fortress of Emain near the city of Armagh
(q.v.), once the residence of the kings of Ulster; and Danes Cast, an
extensive fortification in the south-east of the county, near
Poyntzpass, extending into Co. Down. Spears, battle-axes, collars,
rings, amulets, medals of gold, ornaments of silver, jet and amber, &c.,
have also been found in various places. The religious houses were at
Armagh, Killevy, Kilmore, Stradhailloyse and Tahenny. Of military
antiquities the most remarkable are Tyrone's ditches, near Poyntzpass;
and the pass of Moyry, the entry into the county from the south, which
was fiercely contested by the Irish in 1595 and 1600, is defended by a
castle. The summit of Slieve Gullion is crowned by a large cairn, which
forms the roof of a singular cavern of artificial construction, probably
an early burial-place.