ARMAGNAC, formerly a province of France and the most important fief of
Gascony, now wholly comprised in the department of Gers (q.v.). In the
15th century, when it attained its greatest extent, it included, besides
Armagnac, the neighbouring territories of Fezensac, Fezensaguet,
Pardiac, Pays de Gaure, Rivière Basse, Eauzan and Lomagne, and stretched
from the Garonne to the Adour. Armagnac is a region of hills ranging to
a height of 1000 ft., watered by the river Gers and other rivers which
descend fanwise from the plateau of Lannemezan. On the slope of its
hills grow the grapes from which the famous Armagnac brandy is made. In
Roman Gaul this territory formed part of the diocese of Auch (_civitas
Ausciorum_), which corresponded roughly with the later duchy of Gascony
(q.v.). About the end of the 9th century Fezensac (_comitatus
Fedentiacus_), in circumstances of which no trustworthy record remains,
was erected into an hereditary countship. This latter was in its turn
divided, the south-western portion becoming, about 960, the countship of
Armagnac (_pagus Armaniacus_). The domain of this countship, at first
very limited in extent, continued steadily to increase in size, and
about 1140 Count Gerald III. added the whole of Fezensac to his
possessions. Under the English rule the counts of Armagnac were
turbulent and untrustworthy vassals; and the administration of the Black
Prince, tending to favour the towns of Aquitaine at the expense of the
nobles, drove them to the side of France. The complaint against the
English prince which Count John I., in defiance of the treaty of
Brétigny, himself carried to Paris, was the principal cause of the
resumption of hostilities of 1369, and of the incessant defeats
sustained by the English until the accession of their king Henry V.

At that moment Count Bernard VII. was all-powerful at the French court;
and Charles of Orleans, in order to be able to avenge his father, Louis
of Orleans, who had been assassinated in 1407 by John the Fearless, duke
of Burgundy, married Bonne, Bernard's daughter. This was the origin of
the political party known as "the Armagnacs." With the object of
combating the duke of Burgundy's preponderant influence, a league was
formed at Gien, including the duke of Orleans and his father-in-law, the
dukes of Berry, Bourbon and Brittany, the count of Alençon and all the
other discontented nobles. Bernard VII. ravaged the environs of Paris;
and the treaty of Bicêtre (November 2, 1410) only suspended hostilities
for a few months, war breaking out afresh in the spring of 1411. Paris
sided with the duke of Burgundy, and at his instigation Charles VII.
collected an army to besiege the allies in Bourges. The peace of
Bourges, confirmed at Auxerre on the 22nd of August, put an end to the
war. Paris was dominated at that time by the party of the "butchers," or
_Cabochiens_, which had been organized and armed by the count of
Saint-Pol, brother-in-law of John the Fearless. But their excesses, and
in particular the Cabochien ordinance of the 25th of May 1413, aroused
public indignation; a reaction took place, and in the month of August
the Armagnacs in their turn became masters of the government and of the
king. The duke of Burgundy, besieged in Arras, only obtained peace
(treaty of Arras, September 4, 1414), on condition of not returning to
Paris.

Several months later Henry V. declared war against France; and when, in
August 1415, the English landed in Normandy, the Armagnacs and
Burgundians united against them, but were defeated in the battle of
Agincourt (October 25, 1415). John the Fearless then began negotiations
with the English, while Bernard VII., appointed constable in place of
the count of Saint-Pol, who had been killed at Agincourt, returned to
defend Paris. However, the excesses committed by the Armagnacs incensed
the populace, and John the Fearless, who was ravaging the surrounding
districts, re-entered the capital on the 29th of May 1418, in
consequence of the treason of Perrinet Leclerc. On the 12th of June
Bernard VII. and the members of his party were massacred. From this time
onward the Armagnac party, with the dauphin, afterwards King Charles
VII., at its head, was the national party, while the Burgundians united
with the English. This division in France continued until the treaty of
Arras, on the 21st of September 1435. The rivalry of the Burgundians and
Armagnacs brought terrible disasters upon France, and for many years
afterwards the name of "Armagnacs" was bestowed upon the bands of
adventurers who were as much to be feared as the _Grandes Compagnies_ of
the preceding age.

In 1444-45 the emperor Frederick III. of Germany obtained from Charles
VII. a large army of Armagnacs to enforce his claims in Switzerland,
and the war which ensued took the name of the Armagnac war
(_Armagnakenkrieg_). In Germany the name of the foreigners, who were
completely defeated in the battle of St Jakob on the Birs, not far from
Basel, was mockingly corrupted into _Arme Jacken_, Poor Jackets, or
_Arme Gecken_, Poor Fools.

On the death of Charles of Armagnac, in 1497, the countship was united
to the crown by King Charles VII., but was again bestowed on Charles,
the nephew of that count, by Francis I., who at the same time gave him
his sister Margaret in marriage. After the death of her husband, by whom
she had no children, she married Henry of Albret, king of Navarre; and
thus the countship of Armagnac came back to the French crown along with
the other dominions of Henry IV. In 1645 Louis XIV. erected a countship
of Armagnac in favour of Henry of Lorraine, count of Harcourt, in whose
family it continued till the Revolution. James of Armagnac, grandson of
Bernard VII., was made duke of Nemours in 1462, and was succeeded in the
dukedom by his second son, John, who died without issue, and his third
son, Louis, in whom the house of Armagnac became extinct in 1503.

In 1789 Armagnac was a province forming part of the
_Gouvernement-général_ of Guienne and Gascony; it was divided into two
parts, High or White Armagnac, with Auch for capital, and Low or Black
Armagnac. At the Revolution the whole of the original Armagnac was
included in the department of Gers.

  For authorities see U. Chevalier, _Répertoire des sources hist, du
  moyen âge_, s. Armagnac (Montbéliard, 1894). For the Armagnacs see
  Paul Dognon, "Les Armagnacs et les Bourguignons, le comte de Foix et
  le dauphin en Languedoc" (1416-1420) in _Annales du Midi_ (1889);
  Rameau, "Guerre des Armagnacs dans le Mâconnais" (1418-1435) in the
  _Rév. soc. lit. de l'Ain_ (1884); Berthold Zeller, _Les Armagnacs et
  les Bourguignons, la Commune de 1413_; E. Wulcker, _Urkunden und
  Schreiben betreffend den Zug der Armagnaken_ (Frankfort, 1873); Witte,
  _Die Armagnaken im Elsass, 1439-1445_ (Strassburg, 1889).