ARMADA, THE. The Spanish or Invincible Armada was the great fleet (in
Spanish, _armada_) sent against England by Philip II. in 1588. The
marquis of Santa Cruz, to whom the command had first been given, died on
the 9th of February 1588 (according to the Gregorian calendar then used
by Spain; on the 31st of January by the Julian calendar used in England;
the other dates given in this article will be in Old Style, or Julian
calendar). Santa Cruz was succeeded by Don Alonso Perez de Guzman, duke
of Medina Sidonia, a noble of large estate, but of no experience or
capacity, who took the command unwillingly, and only on the reiterated
order of the king. The fleet was collected at Lisbon, after many delays,
and sailed on the 20th of May 1588. Its nominal strength was 132
vessels, of 59,190 tons, carrying 21,621 soldiers and 8066 sailors. But
from a third to a half of the vessels were transports, galleys or very
small boats, and some of them never reached the Channel. The effective
force was far below the paper strength. On the 10th of June, when the
Armada had rounded Cape Finisterre, it was scattered by squalls. Some of
the vessels went on to the appointed rendezvous at the Scilly Isles, but
the majority anchored on the north coast of Spain. Medina Sidonia, who
found many defects in his fleet, did not finally sail till the 12th of
July. On the English side all the royal navy, and such armed merchant
ships as could be obtained from the ports, had been collected under the
command of the lord high admiral Howard of Effingham, who had with him
Hawkins, Drake and Frobisher as subordinate admirals. The number of
vessels is put at 197, but the majority were very small. It is
impossible to state with confidence what were the relative numbers of
guns carried by the two fleets. The Spaniards had more pieces, but their
gunnery was inferior. The English fleet carried 16,000 or 17,000 men, of
whom the large majority were sailors. About 100 of their ships were at
Plymouth with the lord high admiral. The others were in the Downs with
Lord Henry Seymour and Sir William Winter, to co-operate with a Dutch
squadron under Justinus of Nassau in blockading the Flemish ports, then
occupied by the Spanish army of the duke of Parma. The object was to
prevent the proposed junction of the forces of Medina Sidonia and Parma.
On the 20th of July the Armada was seen off the Lizard. It sailed past
Plymouth, and was followed by the English fleet. The Spaniards, who were
heavy sailers, and were hampered by the transports, were much harassed
by the more active English, and were defeated in all their attempts to
board, which it was their wish to do in order to make use of their
superior numbers of men. The flagship of the squadron of Andalucia,
"Nuestra Señora del Rosario," commanded by Don Pedro de Valdes, was
crippled, fell behind and had to surrender. On the 25th of July, when
the fleets were near the Isle of Wight, a shift of the wind offered the
Spaniards a chance of bringing on a close action, but it soon changed
again. The English fleet, of which part had been in some danger, escaped
uninjured, and the Spaniards stood on. They anchored on the 26th of July
at Calais. The duke of Medina Sidonia now sent an officer to Parma,
calling on him to come to sea and join in a landing on the shore of
England. But Parma could not leave port in face of Justinus of Nassau's
squadron. While these messages were going and coming, Lord Howard had
been joined by Lord Henry Seymour and Sir William Winter from the Downs.
A council of war was held, to decide on the measures to be taken to
assail the Spaniards at Calais. The course taken was to send fireships
among them. On the night of the 28th of July the fireships were sent in,
and produced an utter panic in the Armada. Most of the Spanish vessels
slipped their cables and ran to sea. Others weighed anchor, and escaped
in a more orderly style. One great vessel ran ashore and was taken
possession of by the English, who were however compelled to give her up
by the French governor of Calais. On the 29th of July the scattered
Spaniards, who were quite unable to restore order, were attacked by the
English off Gravelines. The engagement was hot, and, though the English
did not succeed in taking any of the Spaniards, they destroyed some of
them, and their superiority in sailing force and gunnery was now so
obvious that the duke of Medina Sidonia lost heart. His large vessels
were indeed so helpless that only a timely shift of the wind saved many
of them from drifting on to the banks of Flanders. Officers and men
alike were completely discouraged. It was now recognized that an
invasion of England could not be carried out in face of the more active
English fleet and the proved impossibility of bringing about the
proposed union with Parma's army. Suggestions were made that the Armada
should sail to Hamburg, refit there, and renew the attack. But by this
time the Spanish force was incapable of energetic action. Medina Sidonia
and his council could think of nothing but of a return to Spain. As the
wind was westerly, and the English fleet barred the way, it was
impossible to sail down the Channel. The only alternative was to take
the route between the north of Scotland and Norway. So the Armada sailed
to the north. Lord Howard followed, after detaching Lord Henry Seymour
to remain in the Downs. He watched the Spaniards to the Firth of Forth.
The English had at that time little knowledge of the seas beyond the
Firth, and they were beginning to run short of food and ammunition. On
the 2nd of August, therefore, they gave up the pursuit. Medina Sidonia
continued to the north, till his pilots told him that it was safe to
turn to the west. Up to this time the loss of the Spaniards in ships had
not been considerable. If the weather had been that of a normal summer,
they would probably have reached home with no greater loss of men than
was usually inflicted on all fleets of the age by scurvy and fever. But
the summer of 1588 was marked by a succession of gales of unprecedented
violence. The damaged and weakened Spanish ships, which were from the
first greatly undermanned in sailors, were unable to contend with the
storms. It is not possible to give the details of the disasters which
overtook them. Nineteen of them are known to have been wrecked on the
coasts of Scotland and Ireland. The crews who fell into the hands of the
English officers in Ireland were put to the sword. Many more of them
disappeared at sea. Of the total number of the vessels originally
collected for the invasion of England one-half, if not more, perished,
and the crews of those which escaped were terribly diminished by scurvy
and starvation.

The failure of the Armada was mainly due to its own interior weakness,
and as a military operation the English victory was less glorious than
some other less renowned achievements of the British fleet. But the
repulse of the great Spanish armament was an event of the first
historical importance. It marked the final failure of King Philip II. of
Spain to establish the supremacy of the Habsburg dynasty and of the
Church of Rome, which he considered as being in a peculiar sense his
charge, in Europe. From that time forward no serious attempt to invade
England was, or could be, made. It became therefore the unconquerable
supporter of that part of Europe which had thrown off the authority of
the pope. The Armada had much of the character of a crusade. Though
Philip II. had political reasons for hostility to Queen Elizabeth, they
were so intimately bound up with the struggle between the Reformation
and the Counter Reformation that the secular and the religious elements
of the conflict cannot be separated from one another. The struggle was
therefore not one between armed forces in national rivalry alone. It was
a trial of strength between two widely different conceptions of life and
of the state--between the medieval and the modern worlds. The volunteers
of all ranks who came forward in large numbers on both sides were
fighting for a religious cause as well as for the interests of their
respective peoples.

  AUTHORITIES.--The English side of the story of the Armada can best be
  studied in the _State Papers relating to the Defeat of the Spanish
  Armada_, edited by Sir J.K. Laughton, and printed for the Navy
  Records Society (London, 1894). The Spanish side will be found in _La
  Armada Invencible_, by Captain Cesareo Fernandez Duro (Madrid, 1884).
  Froude summarized the work of Captain Fernandez Duro in his brilliant
  _Spanish Story of the Armada_ (London, 1892).     (D. H.)