ARMENIA (old Persian _Armina_, Armenian _Hayasdan_, or _Hayq_), the
popular modern name of a district south of the Caucasus and Black Sea,
which formed part of the ancient Armenian kingdom. The name, which first
occurs in the cuneiform inscriptions of Darius Hystaspis, supplanted the
earlier Urardhu, or Ararat, but its origin is unknown. In its widest
extent Armenia stretched from 37° to 49° E. long., and from 37½° to 41½°
N. lat.; but this area was never, or only for a brief period, united
under one king. Armenia is now divided between Persia, Russia and
Turkey, and the three boundaries have a common point on Little Ararat.

Geographically, Armenia is a continuation westward of the great Iranian
plateau. On the north it descends abruptly to the Black Sea; on the
south it breaks down in rugged terraces to the lowlands of Mesopotamia;
and on the east and west it sinks more gradually to the lower plateaus
of Persia and Asia Minor. Above the general level of the plateau, 6000
ft., rise bare ranges of mountains, which run from north-east to
south-west at an altitude of 8000-12,000 ft., and culminate in Ararat,
17,000 ft. Between the ranges are broad elevated valleys, through which
the rivers of the plateau flow before entering the rugged gorges that
convey their waters to lower levels. Geologically, Armenia consists of
archaic rocks upon which, towards the north, are superimposed
Palaeozoic, and towards the south later sedimentary rocks. The last have
been pierced by volcanic outbursts that extend southward to Lake Van.
Amongst the higher mountains are the two Ararats; Ala-geuz Dagh, north
of the Aras; Bingeul Dagh, south of Erzerum; and the peaks near Lake
Van. The rivers are the Euphrates, Tigris, Aras, Churuk Su (Chorokh) and
Kelkit Irmak, all rising on the plateau. The more important lakes are
Van, 5100 ft., about twice the size of the Lake of Geneva, and Urmia,
4000 ft., both salt; Gokcha or Sevan, 5870 ft., discharging into the
Aras; and Chaldir, into the Kars Chai. The aspect of the plateau is
dreary and monotonous. The valleys are wide expanses of arable land, and
the hills are for the most part grass-covered and treeless. But the
gorges of the Euphrates and Tigris, and their tributaries, cannot be
surpassed in wildness and grandeur. The climate is varied. In the higher
districts the winter is long and the cold severe; whilst the summer is
short, dry and hot. In Erzerum the temperature ranges from -22° to 84°
F., and snow sometimes falls in June. In the valley of the Aras, and in
the western and southern districts, the climate is more moderate. Most
of the towns lie high, from 4000 to 6000 ft. The villages are usually
built on gentle slopes, in which the houses are partially excavated as a
protection against the severity of the weather. Many of the early towns
were on or near the Araxes, and amongst their ruins are the remains of
churches which throw light on the history of Christian architecture in
the East. Armenia is rich in mineral wealth, and there are many hot and
cold mineral springs. The vegetation varies according to the locality.
Cereals and hardy fruits grow on the higher ground, whilst rice is
cultivated in the hot, well-watered valley of the Araxes. The summer is
so hot that the vine grows at much higher altitudes than it does in
western Europe, and the cotton tree and all southern fruit trees are
cultivated in the deeper valleys. On the fine pasture lands which now
support the flocks of the Kurds, the horses and mules, so celebrated in
ancient times, were reared. Trout are found in the rivers, and a small
herring in Lake Van. The country abounds in romantic scenery; that of
the district of Ararat especially has been celebrated by patriotic
historians like Moses of Chorene and Lazarus of Pharb.

_Population._--Accurate statistics cannot be obtained; but it is
estimated that in the nine vilayets, which include Turkish Armenia,
there are 925,000 Gregorian, Roman Catholic and Protestant Armenians,
645,000 other Christians, 100,000 Jews, Gypsies, &c., and 4,460,000
Moslems. The Armenians, taking the most favourable estimate, are in a
majority in nine kazas or sub-districts only (seven near Van, and two
near Mush) out of 159. In Russian Armenia there are 960,000 Armenians,
and in Persian Armenia 130,000. According to an estimate made by General
Zelenyi for the Caucasus Geographical Society (_Zapiski_, vol. xviii.,
Tiflis, 1896, with map), the population of the nine Turkish vilayets,
Erzerum, Van, Bitlis, Kharput (Mamuret-el-Aziz). Diarbekr, Sivas,
Aleppo, Adana and Trebizond, was 6,000,000 (Armenians, 913,875, or 15%;
other Christians, 632,875, or 11%; and Moslems, 4,453,250, or 74%). In
the first five vilayets which contain most of the Armenians, the
population was 2,642,000 (Armenians, 633,250, or 24%; other Christians,
179,875, or 7%; and Moslems, 1,828,875, or 69%); and in the seven
Armenian kazas the population was 282,375 (Armenians, 184,875, or 65%;
other Christians, 1000, or 0.3%; and Moslems, 96,500, or 34.7%). In 1897
there were 970,656 Armenians in Russia, of whom 827,634 were in the
provinces of Erivan, Elisavetpol and Tiflis.

The total number of Armenians is estimated at 2,900,000 (in Turkey,
1,500,000; Russia, 1,000,000; Persia, 150,000; Europe, America and East
Indies, 250,000).

_History._--The history of Armenia has been largely influenced by its
physical features. The isolation of the valleys, especially in winter,
encouraged a tendency to separation, which invariably showed itself when
the central power was weak. The rugged mountains have always been the
home of hardy mountaineers impatient of control, and the sanctuary to
which the lowlanders fled for safety in times of invasion. The country
stands as an open doorway between the East and the West. Through its
long valleys run the roads that connect the Iranian plateau with the
fertile lands and protected harbours of Asia Minor, and for its
possession nations have contended from the remotest past.

  Ethnology.

The original inhabitants of Armenia are unknown, but, about the middle
of the 9th century B.C., the mass of the people belonged to that great
family of tribes which seems to have been spread over western Asia and
to have had a common non-Aryan language. Mixed with these
proto-Armenians, there was an important Semitic element of Assyrian and
Hebrew origin. In the 7th century B.C., between 640 and 600, the country
was conquered by an Aryan people, who imposed their language, and
possibly their name, upon the vanquished, and formed a military
aristocracy that was constantly recruited from Persia and Parthia.
Politically the two races soon amalgamated, but, except in the towns,
there was apparently little intermarriage, for the peasants in certain
districts closely resemble the proto-Armenians, as depicted on their
monuments. After the Arab and Seljuk invasions, there was a large
emigration of Aryan and Semitic Armenians to Constantinople and Cilicia;
and all that remained of the aristocracy was swept away by the Mongols
and Tatars. This perhaps explains the diversity of type and
characteristics amongst the modern Armenians. In the recesses of Mount
Taurus the peasants are tall, handsome, though somewhat sharp-featured,
agile and brave. In Armenia and Asia Minor they are robust, thick-set
and coarse-featured, with straight black hair and large hooked noses.
They are good cultivators of the soil, but are poor, superstitious,
ignorant and unambitious, and they live in semi-subterranean houses as
their ancestors did 800 years B.C. The townsmen, especially in the large
towns, have more regular features--often of the Persian type. They are
skilled artisans, bankers and merchants, and are remarkable for their
industry, their quick intelligence, their aptitude for business, and for
that enterprising spirit which led their ancestors, in Roman times, to
trade with Scythia, China and India. The upper classes are polished and
well educated, and many have occupied high positions in the public
service in Turkey, Russia, Persia and Egypt. The Armenians are
essentially an Oriental people, possessing, like the Jews, whom they
resemble in their exclusiveness and widespread dispersion, a remarkable
tenacity of race and faculty of adaptation to circumstances. They are
frugal, sober, industrious and intelligent, and their sturdiness of
character has enabled them to preserve their nationality and religion
under the sorest trials. They are strongly attached to old manners and
customs, but have also a real desire for progress which is full of
promise. On the other hand they are greedy of gain, quarrelsome in small
matters, self-seeking and wanting in stability; and they are gifted with
a tendency to exaggeration and a love of intrigue which has had an
unfortunate influence on their history. They are deeply separated by
religious differences, and their mutual jealousies, their inordinate
vanity their versatility and their cosmopolitan character must always
be an obstacle to the realization of the dreams of the nationalists. The
want of courage and self-reliance, the deficiency in truth and honesty
sometimes noticed in connexion with them, are doubtless due to long
servitude under an unsympathetic government.

[Illustration: Map of Armenia.]

  Ancient kingdom.

The early history of Armenia, more or less mythical, is partly based on
traditions of the Biainian kings (see ARARAT), and is interwoven with
the Bible narrative, of which a knowledge was possibly obtained from
captive Jews settled in the country by Assyrian and Babylonian monarchs.
The legendary kings are but faint echoes of the kings of Biainas; the
story of Semiramis and Ara is but another form of the myth of Venus and
Adonis; and tradition has clothed Tigranes, the reputed friend of Cyrus,
with the transient glory of the opponent of Lucullus. The fall of the
Biainian kingdom, perhaps overthrown by Cyaxares, was apparently soon
followed by an immigration of Aryan (Medo-Persian) races, including the
progenitors of the Armenians. But they spread slowly, for the "Ten
Thousand," when crossing the plateau to Trebizond, 401-400 B.C., met no
Armenians after leaving the villages four days' march beyond the
Teleboas, now Kara Su. Under the Medes and Persians Armenia was a
satrapy governed by a member of the reigning family; and after the
battle of Arbela, 331 B.C., it was ruled by Persian governors appointed
by Alexander and his successors. Ardvates, 317-284 B.C., freed himself
from Seleucid control; and after the defeat of Antiochus the Great by
the Romans, 190 B.C., Artaxias (Ardashes), and Zadriades, the governors
of Armenia Major and Armenia Minor, became independent kings, with the
concurrence of Rome. (See TIGRANES.) Artaxias established his capital at
Artaxata on the Araxes, and his most celebrated successor was Tigranes
(Dikran), 94-56 B.C., the son-in-law of Mithradates VI., the Great.
Tigranes founded a new capital, Tigranocerta, in northern Mesopotamia,
which he modelled on Nineveh and Babylon, and peopled with Greek and
other captives. Here, and at Antioch, he played the part of "great king"
in Asia until his refusal to surrender his father-in-law involved him in
war with Rome. Defeated, 69 B.C., by Lucullus beneath the walls of his
capital, he surrendered his conquests to Pompey, 66 B.C., who had driven
Mithradates across the Phasis, and was permitted to hold Armenia as a
vassal state of Rome.

  Under later Empire.

  Medieval Partition.

The campaigns of Lucullus and Pompey brought Rome into delicate
relations with Parthia. Armenia, although politically dependent upon
Rome, was connected with Parthia by geographical position, a common
language and faith, intermarriage and similarity of arms and dress. It
had never been Hellenized, as the provinces of Asia Minor had been; the
Roman provincial system was never applied to it; and the policy of Rome
towards it was never consistent. The country became the field upon which
the East and West contended for mastery, and the struggle ended for a
time in the partition of Armenia, A.D. 387, between Rome and Persia. The
Roman portion was soon added to the Diocesis Pontica. The Persian
portion, Pers-Armenia, remained a vassal state under an Arsacid prince
until 428. It was afterwards governed by Persian and Armenian noblemen
selected by the "great king," and entitled _marzbans_. Before the
partition, Tiridates, converted by St Gregory, "the Illuminator," had
established Christianity as the religion of the state, and set an
example followed later by Constantine. After the partition, the
invention of the Armenian alphabet, and the translation of the Bible
into the vernacular, 410, drew the Armenians together, and the
discontinuance of Greek in the Holy Offices relaxed the ecclesiastical
dependence on Constantinople, which ceased entirely when the Patriarch,
491, refused to accept the decrees of the council of Chalcedon. The rule
of the _marzbans_ was marked by relentless persecution of the
Christians, forced conversions to Magism, frequent insurrections and the
rise to importance of the great families founded by men of Assyrian,
Parthian, Persian, Syrian and Jewish origin, and in some cases of royal
blood, who had been governors of districts, or holders of fiefs under
the Arsacids. Amongst the _marzbans_ were Jewish Bagratids and Persian
Mamegonians; and one of the latter family, Vartan, made himself
independent (571-578), with Byzantine aid. In 632 the victories of
Heraclius restored Armenia to the Byzantines; but the war that followed
the Arab invasion, 636, left the country in the hands of the caliphs,
who set over it Arab and Armenian governors (_ostikans_). One of the
governors, the Bagratid Ashod I., was crowned king of Armenia by the
caliph Motamid, 885, and founded a dynasty which ended with Kagig II. in
1079. A little later the Ardzrunian Kagig, governor of Vaspuragan or
Van, was crowned king of that province by the caliph Moktadir, 908, and
his descendants ruled at Van and Sivas until 1080. The Bagratids founded
dynasties at Kars, 962-1080, and in Georgia, which they held until its
absorption, 1801, by Russia. From 984 to 1085 the country from Diarbekr
to Melasgerd was ruled under the suzerainty first of Arabs then of
Byzantines and Seljuks, by the Mervanid dynasty of Kurds, called princes
of Abahuni ([Greek: Apachouvaes]). The Arab invasion drove many Armenian
noblemen to Constantinople, where they intermarried with the old Roman
families or became soldiers of fortune. Artavasdes, an Arsacid, usurped
the Byzantine throne for two years; Leo V., an Ardzrunian, and John
Zimisces, became emperors; whilst Manuel, the Mamegonian, and others
were amongst the best generals of the empire. In 991, and again in 1021,
Basil II. invaded Armenia, and in the latter year Senekherim, king of
Vaspuragan, exchanged his kingdom for Sivas and its territory, where he
settled down with many Armenian emigrants. Basil's policy was to make
the great Armenian fortresses, garrisoned by imperial troops, the first
line of defence on his eastern frontier; but it failed in the hands of
his feeble successors, who thought more of converting heretical Armenia
than of defending its frontier. The king of Ani, Kagig II., was
compelled to exchange his kingdom for estates in Cappadocia. The country
was raided by Seljuks and harried by Byzantine soldiers, and the
miseries of the people were regarded as gain to the Orthodox church.
After the defeat and capture of Romanus IV. by Alp Arslan, 1071, Armenia
formed part of the Seljuk empire until it split up, 1157, into petty
states, ruled by Arabs, Kurds and Seljuks, who were in turn swept away
by the Mongol invasion, 1235. For more than three centuries after the
appearance of the Seljuks, Armenia was traversed by a long succession of
nomad tribes whose one aim was to secure good pasturage for their flocks
on their way to the richer lands of Asia Minor. The cultivators were
driven from the plains, agriculture was destroyed, and the country was
seriously impoverished when its ruin was completed by the ravages and
wholesale butcheries of Timur. Many Armenians fled to the mountains,
where they embraced Islam, and intermarried with the Kurds, or purchased
security by paying blackmail to Kurdish chiefs. Others migrated to
Cappadocia or to Cilicia, where the Bagratid Rhupen had founded, 1080, a
small principality which, gradually extending its limits, became the
kingdom of Lesser Armenia. This Christian kingdom in the midst of Moslem
states, hostile to the Byzantines, giving valuable support to the
leaders of the crusades, and trading with the great commercial cities of
Italy, had a stormy existence of about 300 years. Internal disorders,
due to attempts by the later Lusignan kings to make their subjects
conform to the Roman Church, facilitated its conquest by Egypt, 1375.
The memory of Kiligia (Cilicia) is enshrined in a popular song, and at
Zeitun, in the recesses of Mount Taurus, a small Armenian community has
hitherto maintained almost complete independence. After the death of
Timur, Armenia formed part of the territories of the Turkoman dynasties
of Ak- and Kara-Kuyunli, and under their milder rule the seat of the
Catholicus, which, during the Seljuk invasion, had been moved first to
Sivas, and then to Lesser Armenia, was re-established, 1441, at
Echmiadzin.

  Under Turkey.

In 1514, the Persian campaign of Selim I. gave Armenia to the Osmanli
Turks, and its reorganization was entrusted to Idris, the historian, who
was a Kurd of Bitlis. Idris found the rich arable lands almost deserted,
and the mountains bristling with the castles of independent chieftains,
of Kurd, Arab and Armenian descent, between whom there were
long-standing feuds. He compelled the Kurds to settle on the vacant
lands, and divided the country into small sanjaks which in the plains
were governed by Turkish officials, and in the mountains by local
chiefs. This policy gave rest to the country, but favoured the growth of
Kurd influence and power, which by 1534 had spread westwards to Angora.
Armenia was invaded by the Persians in 1575, and again in 1604, when
Shah Abbas transplanted many thousand Armenians from Julfa to his new
capital Isfahan. In 1639, the province of Erivan, which included
Echmiadzin, was assigned by treaty to Persia, and it remained in her
hands until it passed to Russia, 1828, under the treaty of Turkman-chai.
The Turko-Russian War of 1828-29, which advanced the Russian frontier to
the Arpa Chai, was followed by a large emigration of Armenians from
Turkish to Russian territory, and a smaller exodus took place after the
war of 1877-78, which gave Batum, Ardahan and Kars to Russia. In 1834
the independent power of the Kurds in Armenia was greatly curtailed; and
risings under Bedr Khan Bey in 1843, and Sheik Obeidullah in 1880, were
firmly suppressed.

  Gregorian Armenians.

After the capture of Constantinople, 1453, Mahommed II. organized his
non-Moslem subjects in communities, or _millets_, under ecclesiastical
chiefs to whom he gave absolute authority in civil and religious
matters, and in criminal offences that did not come under the Moslem
religious law. Under this system the Armenian bishop of Brusa, who was
appointed patriarch of Constantinople by the sultan, became the civil,
and practically the ecclesiastical head of his community (_Ermeni
millet_), and a recognized officer of the imperial government with the
rank of vizier. He was assisted by a council of bishops and clergy, and
was represented in each province by a bishop. This _imperium in imperio_
secured to the Armenians a recognized position before the law, the free
enjoyment of their religion, the possession of their churches and
monasteries, and the right to educate their children and manage their
municipal affairs. It also encouraged the growth of a community life,
which eventually gave birth to an intense longing for national life. On
the other hand it degraded the priesthood. The priests became political
leaders rather than spiritual guides, and sought promotion by bribery
and intrigue. Education was neglected and discouraged, servility and
treachery were developed, and in less than a century the people had
become depraved and degraded to an almost incredible extent. After the
issue, 1839, of the _hatt-i-skerif_ of Gül-khaneh, the tradesmen and
artisans of the capital freed themselves from clerical control. Under
regulations, approved by the sultan in 1862, the patriarch remained the
official representative of the community, but all real power passed into
the hands of clerical and lay councils elected by a representative
assembly of 140 members. The "community," which excluded Roman Catholics
and Protestants, was soon called the "nation," "domestic" became
"national" affairs, and the "representative" the "national" assembly.

  Roman Catholics.

The connexion of "Lesser Armenia" with the Western powers led to the
formation, 1335, of an Armenian fraternity, "the Unionists," which
adopted the dogmas of the Roman church, and at the council of Florence,
1439, was entitled the "United Armenian Church." Under the millet system
the unionists were frequently persecuted by the patriarchs, but this
ended in 1830, when, at the intervention of France, they were made a
community (_Katoluk millet_), with their own ecclesiastical head. The
Roman Catholics, through the works issued by the Mechitharists at
Venice, have greatly promoted the progress of education and the
development of Armenian literature. They are most numerous at
Constantinople, Angora and Smyrna.

  Protestants.

The Protestant movement, initiated at Constantinople by American
missionaries in 1831, was opposed by the patriarchs and Russia. In 1846
the patriarch anathematized all Armenians with Protestant sympathies,
and this led to the formation of the "Evangelical Church of the
Armenians," which was made, after much opposition from France and
Russia, a community (_Protestant millet_), at the instance of the
British ambassador. The missionaries afterwards founded colleges on the
Bosporus, at Kharput, Marsivan and Aintab, to supply the needs of higher
university education, and they opened good schools for both sexes at all
their stations. Everywhere they supplied the people with pure, wholesome
literature, and represented progress and religious liberty.

  Modern Armenian question.

When Abd-ul-Hamid came to the throne of Turkey in 1876, the condition of
the Armenians was better than it had ever been under the Osmanlis; but
with the close of the war of 1877-78 came the "Armenian Question." By
the treaty of San Stefano, Turkey engaged to Russia to carry out reforms
"in the provinces inhabited by the Armenians, and to guarantee their
security against the Kurds and Circassians." By the treaty of Berlin,
13th of July 1878, a like engagement to the six signatory powers was
substituted for that to Russia. By the Cyprus convention, 4th of June
1878, the sultan promised Great Britain to introduce necessary reforms
"for the protection of the Christians and other subjects of the Porte"
in the Turkish territories in Asia. The Berlin treaty encouraged the
Armenians to look to the powers, and not to Russia for protection; and
the convention, which did not mention the Armenians, was regarded as
placing them under the special protection of Great Britain. This
impression was strengthened by the action of England at Berlin in
insisting that Russia should evacuate the occupied territory before
reforms were introduced, and so removing the only security for their
introduction. The presentation of identic and collective notes to the
Porte by the powers, in 1880, produced no result, and in 1882 it was
apparent that Turkey would only yield to compulsion. In 1881 a circular
note from the British ministry to the five powers was evasively
answered, and in 1883 Prince Bismarck intimated to the British
government that Germany cared nothing about Armenian reforms and that
the matter had better be allowed to drop. Russia had changed her policy
towards the Armenians, and the other powers were indifferent. The
so-called "Concert of Europe" was at an end, but British ministries
continued to call the attention of the sultan to his obligations under
the treaty of Berlin.

  Russian policy.

Russia began to interest herself in the Armenians when she acquired
Georgia in 1801; but it was not until 1828-1829 that any appreciable
number of them became her subjects. She found them necessary to the
development of her new territories, and allowed them much freedom. They
were permitted, within certain limits, to develop their national life;
many became wealthy, and many rose to high positions in the military and
civil service of the state. After the war of 1877-78 the Russian consuls
in Turkey encouraged the formation of patriotic committees in Armenia,
and a project was formed to create a separate state, under the supremacy
of Russia, which was to include Russian, Persian and Turkish Armenia.
The project was favoured by Loris-Melikov, then all-powerful in Russia,
but in 1881 Alexander II. was assassinated, and shortly afterwards a
strongly anti-Armenian policy was adopted. The schools were closed, the
use of the Armenian language was discouraged, and attempts were made to
Russify the Armenians and bring them within the pale of the Russian
Church. All hope of practical self-government under Russian protection
now ceased, and the Armenians of Tiflis turned their attention to
Turkish Armenia. They had seen the success of the Slav committees in
treating disturbances in the Balkans, and became the moving spirit in
the attempts to produce similar troubles in Armenia. Russia made no real
effort to check the action of her Armenian subjects, and after 1884 she
steadily opposed any active interference by Great Britain in favour of
the Turkish Armenians. When Echmiadzin passed to Russia, in 1828, the
Catholicus began to claim spiritual jurisdiction over the whole Armenian
Church, and the submission of the patriarch of Constantinople was
obtained by Russia when she helped the sultan against Mehemet Ali.
Subsequently Russia secured the submission of the independent catholicus
of Sis, and thus acquired a power of interference in Armenian affairs in
all parts of the world. During 1900 Russia showed renewed interest in
Turkish Armenia by securing the right to construct all railways in it,
and in the Armenians by pressing the Porte to restore order and
introduce reforms.

  Revolutionary movement.

The Berlin treaty was a disappointment to the Gregorian Armenians, who
had hoped that Armenia and Cilicia would have been formed into an
autonomous province administered by Christians. But the formation of
such a province was impossible. The Gregorians were scattered over the
empire, and, except in a few small districts, were nowhere in a
majority. Nor were they bound together by any community of thought or
sentiment. The Turkish-speaking Armenians of the south could scarcely
converse with the Armenian-speaking people of the north; and the
ignorant mountaineers of the east had nothing in common, except
religion, with the highly educated townsmen of Constantinople and
Smyrna. After the change in Russian policy and the failure of the powers
to secure reforms, the advanced party amongst the Armenians, some of
whom had been educated in Europe and been deeply affected by the free
thought and Nihilistic tendencies of the day, determined to secure their
object by the production of disturbances such as those that had given
birth to Bulgaria. Societies were formed at Tiflis and in several
European capitals for the circulation of pamphlets and newspapers, and
secret societies, such as the Huntchagist, were instituted for more
revolutionary methods. An active propaganda was carried on in Turkish
Armenia by emissaries, who tried to introduce arms and explosives, and
represented the ordinary incidents of Turkish misrule to Europe as
serious atrocities. The revolutionary movement was joined by some of the
younger men, who formed local committees on the Nihilist plan, but it
was strongly opposed by the Armenian clergy and the American
missionaries, who saw the impossibility of success; and its irreligious
tendency and the self-seeking ambition of its leaders made it
unacceptable to the mass of the people. Exasperated at their failure,
the emissaries organized attacks on individuals, wrote threatening
letters, and at last posted revolutionary placards, 5th of January 1893,
at Yuzgat, and on the walls of the American College at Marsivan. In the
last case the object of the Huntchagists was to compromise the
missionaries, and in this they succeeded. The Americans were accused of
issuing the placards; two Armenian professors were imprisoned; and the
girls' school was burned down. Outbreaks, easily suppressed, followed at
Kaisarieh and other places.

One of the revolutionary dreams was to make the ancient Daron the centre
of a new Armenia. But the movement met with no encouragement, either
amongst the prosperous peasants on the rich plain of Mush or in the
mountain villages of Sasun. In the summer of 1893, an emissary was
captured near Mush, and the governor, hoping to secure others, ordered
the Kurdish Irregular Horse to raid the mountain district. The Armenians
drove off the Kurds,[1] and, when attacked in the spring of 1894, again
held their own. The vali now called up regular troops from Erzingan; and
the sultan issued a firman calling upon all loyal subjects to aid in
suppressing the revolt. A massacre of a most brutal character, in which
Turkish soldiers took part, followed; and aroused deep indignation in
Europe. In November 1894 a Turkish commission of inquiry was sent to
Armenia, and was accompanied by the consular delegates of Great Britain,
France and Russia, who elicited the fact that there had been no attempt
at revolt to justify the action of the authorities. Throughout 1894 the
state of the country bordered upon anarchy, and during the winter of
1894-1895 the British government, with lukewarm support from France and
Russia, pressed for administrative reforms in the vilayets of Erzerum,
Van, Bitlis, Sivas, Memuret-el-Aziz (Kharput) and Diarbekr. The Porte
made counter-proposals, and officials concerned in the Sasun massacres
were decorated and rewarded. On the 11th of May 1895 the three powers
presented to the sultan a complicated scheme of reforms which was more
calculated to increase than to lessen the difficulties connected with
the government of Armenia; but it was the only one to which Russia would
agree. The sultan delayed his answer. Great Britain was in favour of
coercion, but Russia, when sounded, replied that she "would certainly
not join in any coercive measures" and she was supported by France. At
this moment, 21st of June 1895, Lord Rosebery's cabinet resigned, and
when Lord Salisbury's government resumed the negotiations in August, the
sultan appealed to France and Russia against England. During the
negotiations the secret societies had not been inactive. Disturbances
occurred at Tarsus; Armenians who did not espouse the "national" cause
were murdered; the life of the patriarch was threatened; and a report
was circulated that the British ambassador wished some Armenians killed
to give him an excuse for bringing the fleet to Constantinople. On the
1st of October 1895 a number of Armenians, some armed, went in
procession with a petition to the Porte and were ordered by the police
to disperse. Shots were fired, and a riot occurred in which many
Armenian and some Moslem lives were lost. The British ambassador now
pressed the scheme of reforms upon the sultan, who accepted it on the
17th of October. Meanwhile there had been a massacre at Trebizond
(October 8), in which armed men from Constantinople took part, and it
had become evident that no united action on the part of the powers was
to be feared. The sultan refused to publish the scheme of reforms, and
massacre followed massacre in Armenia in quick succession until the 1st
of January 1896. Nothing was done. Russia refused to agree to any
measure of coercion, and declared (December 19) that she would take no
action except such as was needed for the protection of foreigners. Great
Britain was not prepared to act alone. In the summer of 1896 (June
14-22) there were massacres at Van, Egin, and Niksar; and on the 26th of
August the Imperial Ottoman Bank at Constantinople was seized by
revolutionists as a demonstration against the Christian powers who had
left the Armenians to their fate. The project was known to the Porte,
and the rabble, previously armed and instructed, were at once turned
loose in the streets. Two days' massacre followed, during which from
6000 to 7000 Gregorian Armenians perished.

  The massacres.

The massacres were apparently organized and carried out in accordance
with a well-considered plan. They occurred, except in six places, in the
vilayets to which the scheme of reforms was to apply. At Trebizond they
took place just before the sultan accepted that scheme, and after his
acceptance of it they spread rapidly. They were confined to Gregorian
and Protestant Armenians. The Roman Catholics were protected by France,
the Greek Christians by Russia. The massacre of Syrians, Jacobites and
Chaldees at Urfa and elsewhere formed no part of the original plan.
Orders were given to protect foreigners, and in some cases guards were
placed over their houses. The damage to the American buildings at
Kharput was due to direct disobedience of orders. The attacks on the
bazars were made without warning, during business hours, when the men
were in their shops and the women in their houses. Explicit promises
were given, in some instances, that there would be no danger to those
who opened their shops, but they were deliberately broken. Nearly all
those who, from their wealth, education and influence, would have had a
share in the government under the scheme of reforms, were killed and
their families ruined by the destruction of their property. Where any
attempt at defence was made the slaughter was greatest. The only
successful resistance was at Zeitun, where the people received
honourable terms after three months' fighting. In some towns the troops
and police took an active part in the massacres. At Kharput artillery
was used. In some the slaughter commenced and ended by bugle-call, and
in a few instances the Armenians were disarmed beforehand. Wherever a
superior official or army officer intervened the massacre at once
ceased, and wherever a governor stood firm there was no disturbance. The
actual perpetrators of the massacres were the local Moslems, aided by
Lazis, Kurds and Circassians. A large majority of the Moslems
disapproved of the massacres, and many Armenians were saved by Moslem
friends. But the lower orders were excited by reports that the
Armenians, supported by the European powers, were plotting the overthrow
of the sultan; and their cupidity was aroused by the prospect of wiping
out their heavy debts to Armenian pedlars and merchants. No one was
punished for the massacres, and many of those implicated in them were
rewarded. In some districts, especially in the Kharput vilayet, the cry
of "Islam or death" was raised. Gregorian priests and Protestant pastors
were tortured, but preferred death to apostasy. Men and women were
killed in prison and in churches in cold blood. Churches, monasteries,
schools and houses were plundered and destroyed. In some places there
was evidence of the previous activity of secret societies, in others
none. The number of those who perished, excluding Constantinople, was
20,000 to 25,000.[2] Many were forced to embrace Islam, and numbers were
reduced to poverty. The destruction of property was enormous, the
hardest-working and best tax-paying element in the country was
destroyed, or impoverished, and where the breadwinners were killed the
women and children were left destitute. Efforts by Great Britain and the
United States to alleviate the distress were opposed by the authorities,
but met with some success. After the massacres the number of students in
the American schools and colleges increased, and many Gregorian
Armenians became Roman Catholics in order to obtain the protection of
France.

The Armenian revolutionary societies continued their propaganda down to
the granting of the Turkish constitution in 1908; and meanwhile further
massacres occurred here and there, notably at Mush (1904) and Van
(1908).

  See Abich, _Geologie d. armenischen Hochlandes_ (Wien, 1882); Bishop,
  _Journeys in Persia and Kurdistan_ (Lond., 1891); Bliss, _Turkey and
  the Armenian Atrocities_ (Lond., 1896); Bryce, _Transcaucasia and
  Ararat_ (4th ed., Lond., 1896); De Coursous, _La Rébellion arménienne_
  (Paris, 1895); Lepsius, _Armenia and Europe_ (Lond., 1897); Murray,
  _Handbook for Asia Minor_ (Lond., 1895); Parly. Papers, _Turkey_, I.
  (1895); _Turkey_, I., II. (1896); Supan, "Die Verbreitung d. Armenier
  in der asiatischen Turkei, u. in Transkaukasien," in Pet. _Mitt_. vol.
  xlii. (1896); Tozer, _Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor_ (Lond.,
  1881); Cholet, _Arménie, Kurdistan, et Mésopotamie_ (1892); Lynch,
  _Armenia_ (2 vols., 1901).     (C. W. W.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The Armenians and Kurds have lived together from the earliest
    times. The adoption of Islam by the latter, and by many Armenians,
    divided the people sharply into Christian and Moslem, and placed the
    Christian in a position of inferiority. But the relations between the
    two sects were not unfriendly previously to the Russian campaigns in
    Persia and Turkey. After 1829 the relations became less friendly; and
    later, when the Armenians attracted the sympathies of the European
    powers after the war of 1877-78, they became bitterly hostile.

  [2] According to some estimates the number killed was 50,000 or more.