ARMFELT, GUSTAF MAURITZ, COUNT (1757-1814), son of Charles II.'s
general, Carl Gustaf Armfelt, was born in Finland on the 31st of March
1757. In 1774 he became an ensign in the guards, but his frivolity
provoked the displeasure of Gustavus III. and he thought it prudent to
go abroad. Subsequently, however, (1780) he met the king again at Spa
and completely won the monarch's favour by his natural amiability,
intelligence and brilliant social gifts. Henceforth his fortune was
made. At first he was the _maître des plaisirs_ of the Swedish court,
but it was not long before more serious affairs were entrusted to him.
He took part in the negotiations with Catherine II. (1783) and with the
Danish government (1787), and during the Russian war of 1788-90 he was
one of the king's most trusted and active counsellors. He also displayed
great valour in the field. In 1788 when the Danes unexpectedly invaded
Sweden and threatened Gothenburg, it was Armfelt who under the king's
directions organized the Dalecarlian levies and led them to victory. He
remained absolutely faithful to Gustavus when nearly the whole of the
nobility fell away from him; brilliantly distinguished himself in the
later phases of the Russian war; and was the Swedish plenipotentiary at
the conclusion of the peace of Verelä. During the last years of Gustavus
III. his influence was paramount, though he protested against his
master's headstrong championship of the Bourbons. On his deathbed
Gustavus III. (1792) committed the care of his infant son to Armfelt and
appointed him a member of the council of regency; but the anti-Gustavian
duke-regent Charles sent Armfelt as Swedish ambassador to Naples to get
rid of him. From Naples Armfelt communicated with Catherine II., urging
her to bring about by means of a military demonstration a change in the
Swedish government in favour of the Gustavians. The plot was discovered
by the regent's spies, and Armfelt only escaped from the man-of-war sent
to Naples to seize him, with the assistance of Queen Caroline. He now
fled to Russia, where he was interned at Kaluga, while at home he was
condemned to confiscation and death as a traitor, and his unjustly
accused mistress Magdalena Rudenschöld was publicly whipped to gratify
an old grudge of the regent's. When Gustavus IV. attained his majority,
Armfelt was completely rehabilitated and sent as Swedish ambassador to
Vienna (1802), but was obliged to quit that post two years later for
sharply attacking the Austrian government's attitude towards Bonaparte.
From 1805 to 1807 he was commander-in-chief of the Swedish forces in
Pomerania, where he displayed great ability and retarded the conquest of
the duchy as long as it was humanly possible. On his return home, he was
appointed commander-in-chief on the Norwegian frontier, but could do
nothing owing to the _ordres, contre-ordres et désordres_ of his lunatic
master. He would have nothing to say to the revolutionaries who in 1809
deposed Gustavus IV. and his whole family. Armfelt was the most
courageous of the supporters of the crown prince Gustavus, and when
Bernadotte was elected resolved to retire to Finland. His departure was
accelerated by a decree of expulsion as a conspirator (1811). Over the
impressionable Alexander I. of Russia, Armfelt exercised almost as great
an influence as Czartoryski, especially as regards Finnish affairs. He
contributed more than any one else to the erection of the grand-duchy
into an autonomous state, and was its first and best governor-general.
The plan of the Russian defensive campaigns is, with great probability,
also attributed to him, and he gained Alexander over to the plan of
uniting Norway with Sweden. He died at Tsarskoe Selo on the 19th of
August 1814.

  See Robert Nisbet Bain, _Gustavus III._ vol. ii. (London, 1895); Elof
  Tegner, _Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt_ (Stockholm, 1883-1887).     (R. N. B.)