ARMINIUS, the Latinized form of the name of HERMANN, or more probably
ARMIN (17 B.C.-A.D. 21), the German national hero. He was a son of a
certain Segimer, a prince of the tribe of the Cherusci, and in early
life served with distinction as an officer in the Roman armies.
Returning to his own people he found them chafing under the yoke of the
Roman governor, Quintilius Varus; he entertained for them hopes of
freedom, and cautiously inducing neighbouring tribes to join his
standard he led the rebellion which broke out in the autumn of A.D. 9.
Heavily laden with baggage the troops of Varus were decoyed into the
fastnesses of the Teutoburger Wald, and there attacked, the completeness
of the barbarian victory being attested by the virtual annihilation of
three legions, by the voluntary death of Varus, and by the terror which
reigned in Rome when the news of the defeat became known, a terror which
found utterance in the emperor's despairing cry: "Varus, give me back my
legions!" Then in A.D. 15 Germanicus Caesar led the Romans against
Arminius, and captured his wife, Thusnelda. An indecisive battle was
fought in the Teutoburger Wald, where Germanicus narrowly escaped the
fate of Varus, and in the following year Arminius was defeated. The
hero's later years were spent in fighting against Marbod, prince of the
Marcomanni, and in disputes with his own people occasioned probably by
his desire to found a powerful kingdom. He was murdered in A.D. 21.

In 1875 a great monument to Arminius was completed. This stands on the
Grotenburg mountain near Detmold. Klopstock and other poets have used
his exploits as material for dramas.

  Much discussion has taken place with regard to the exact spot in the
  Teutoburger Wald where the great battle between Arminius and Varus was
  fought. There is an immense literature on this subject, and the
  following may be consulted:--T. Mommsen, _Die Ortlichkeit der
  Varusschlacht_ (1885); E. Meyer, _Untersuchungen über die Schlacht im
  Teutoburger Walde_ (1893); A. Wilms, _Die Schlacht im Teutoburger
  Walde_ (1899); F. Knoke, _Das Schlachtfeld im Teutoburger Walde_
  (1899); E. Dünzelmann, _Der Schauplatz der Varusschlacht_ (1889); and
  P. Höfer, _Die Varusschlacht_ (1888). For more general accounts of
  Arminius see: Tacitus, _Annals_, edited by H. Furneaux (1884-1891); O.
  Kemmer, _Arminius_ (1893); F.W. Fischer, _Armin und die Römer_
  (1893); W. Uhl, _Das Portrait des Arminius_ (1898); and F. Knoke, _Die
  Kriegszüge des Germanicus in Deutschland_ (1887).