ARMISTICE (from Lat. _arma_, arms, and _sistere_, to stop), a suspension
of hostilities by mutual agreement between two nations at war, or their
respective forces. An armistice may be either general or particular; in
the first case there is a complete cessation of hostile operations in
every part of the dominions of the belligerent powers; in the second
there is merely a temporary truce between two contending armies, or
between a besieged fortress and the force besieging it. Such a temporary
truce, when for a very limited period and for a special purpose, e.g.
the collection of the wounded and the burial of the dead, is termed a
_suspension of arms_. A general armistice cannot be concluded by the
commanders-in-chief unless special authority has been previously
delegated to them by their respective governments; otherwise any
arrangement entered into by them requires subsequent ratification by the
supreme powers of the states. A partial truce may be concluded by the
officers of the respective powers, without any special authority from
their governments, wherever, from the nature and extent of the commands
they exercise, their duties could not be efficiently discharged without
their possession of such a power. The conduct of belligerent parties
during an armistice is usually regulated in modern warfare by express
agreement between the parties, but where this is not the case the
following general conditions may be laid down. (1) Each party may do,
within the limits prescribed by the truce, whatever he could have done
in time of peace. For example, he can raise troops, collect stores,
receive reinforcements and fortify places that are not actually in a
state of siege. (2) Neither party can take advantage of the armistice to
do what he could not have done had military operations continued. Thus
he cannot throw provisions or reinforcements into a besieged town, and
neither besiegers nor besieged are at liberty to repair their
fortifications or erect new works. (3) All things contained in places
the possession of which was contested, must remain in the state in which
they were before the armistice began. Any infringement by either party
of the conditions of the truce entitles the other to recommence hostile
operations without previous intimation.