ARMOIRE, the French name (cf. ALMERY) given to a tall movable cupboard,
or "wardrobe," with one or more doors. It has varied considerably in
shape and size, and the decoration of its doors and sides has faithfully
represented mutations of fashion and modifications of use. It was
originally exceedingly massive and found its chief decoration in
elaborate hinges and locks of beaten iron. The finer ecclesiastical
armoires or aumbries which have come down to us--used in churches for
the safe custody of vestments, eucharistic vessels, reliquaries and
other precious objects--are usually painted, sometimes even upon the
interior, with sacred subjects or with incidents from the lives of the
saints. The cathedrals of Bayeux and Noyon contain famous examples; the
most typical English one is in York minster. By the end of the 14th
century, when the carpenter and the wood-carver had acquired a better
mastery of their material, the taste for painted surfaces appears to
have given place to the vogue of carving, and the simple rectangular
panels gradually became sculptured with a simple motive, such as the
linen-fold or parchment patterns. In the treasury of St Germain
l'Auxerrois the ends of the 15th-century armoires are treated in this
way. In that and the two following centuries the keys and the
escutcheons of the locks became highly ornamental; usually in forged
iron, they were occasionally made of more precious metals. By slow
degrees the shape of this receptacle changed--from breadth was evolved
height, and the tall form of armoire became characteristic. The
Renaissance exercised a notable effect upon this, as upon so many other
varieties of furniture. It became less obviously and aggressively a
thing of utility; its proportions shrank from the massive to the
elegant; its artistic effectiveness was vastly enhanced by its division
into an upper and a lower part. Enriched with columns and pilasters, its
panels carved with mythology, its canopied niches filled with sculptured
statuettes, and terminating with a rich cornice and perhaps a broken
pediment, it was widely removed in appearance, if not in purpose, from
the uncompromising iron-mounted receptacle of earlier generations.
During the 16th century, when the surging impulses of the Renaissance
had died away, the armoire relapsed into plainness, its proportions
increased, and it was again constructed in one piece. Ere long, however,
it grew more sumptuous than ever. Boulle encrusted it with marqueterie
from designs by Bérain; it glowed with _amorini_, with the torches and
arrows of Cupid, with the garlands which he weaves for his captives, and
when allusiveness left a corner vacant, it was filled with arabesques in
ebony or ivory, in brass or white metal. While the royal palaces and the
hôtels of the great nobility were filled with those costly splendours,
the ordinary cabinetmaker continued to construct his modest pieces, and
by the middle of the 18th century the armoire was found in every French
house, ample in width and high in proportion to the lofty rooms of the
period. It is not to be supposed that so useful a piece of furniture was
confined to France. It was used, more or less, throughout a considerable
part of Europe, but it was distinctively Gallic nevertheless, and never
became thoroughly acclimatized elsewhere until about the beginning of
the 19th century, when it developed into the glass-fronted wardrobe
which is now an essential detail in the plenishing of the bed-chamber,
not merely in France and England, but in many other countries. The
_armoire à glace_ was known and occasionally made in France as far back
as the middle of the 18th century, and almost the earliest mention of it
connects it with the scandalous relations of the Maréchal de Richelieu
and the beautiful _fermière générale_, Mme de la Popelinière, who had
one made to mask a secret door. In the conventional and not very
attractive wardrobe of commerce it is difficult to descry the gracious
characteristics of the armoire of the Renaissance or the 17th century,
and it is not altogether surprising that Théodore de Banville should
have condemned one of the most solidly useful of household necessaries
as a "hideous monster."